carved entrance doors . 
That was the idea I agreed . 
Inside it was exactly as Id anticipated the kind of vulgar ostentation too many of the
wealthy mistake for good taste with crystal and gilt and garish tapestries of historic
battles and smug looking primarchs strewn around the place like a pirates warehouse . 
The high arched ceiling was supported by pillars artfully carved to mimic the bark of
some species of local tree and my feet sank into the carpet as though it were a swamp . 
It took me a moment to realise that the weave would form a vast portrait presumably
of the governor himself if viewed from the upper landing and I noted with faint
amusement that someone had trodden on a dropped canape making it look as though
his nose was running . Whether it was a genuine accident or the act of a disgruntled
servant who could say . Kasteens lips quirked as she absorbed the full opulence of
our surroundings . 
I take it back she said quietly . A bordello would have been done out in far better
taste . I suppressed a smile of my own as another flunkey ushered us forward . 
Commissar Ciaphas Cain he announced . And Colonel Regina Kasteen . Which at
least established who we were . It was pretty obvious who the unhealthy looking
individual sitting on a raised dais at the end of the room was . Ive met a good few
planetary governors in my day and they all tend towards inbred imbecility1
 but this
specimen looked like he should take the prize . He somehow contrived to look both
undernourished and flabby at the same time and his skin was the pallor of a dead fish . 
Watery eyes of no particular colour goggled at us from under a fringe of thinning grey
hair . 
Governor Grice I said bowing formally . A pleasure . 
On the contrary he said his voice quivering a little . The pleasures entirely mine . 
Well he wasnt wrong on that account but he was ignoring me entirely . He stood and
bowed to Kasteen . You honour us all with your presence colonel . 
Well that was a new experience being ignored in favour of a slip of a girl but I
suppose if youd ever met her youd understand it . She was pretty striking if redheads
were your thing and I supposed the old fool didnt get out much . Anyway it enabled
me to fade out of the picture and go looking for some amusement of my own which I
did with all due dispatch . 
As was my habit I circulated widely keeping my eyes and ears open as you never know
what useful little snippets of information will come in handy although the main thing
that caught my attention was the entertainment . 
Like many of Cains sweeping generalisations this does contain an element of truth . The majority of
planetary governorships are hereditary positions and many of the incumbents arent up to the challenge of
the job . However the truly incompetent tend to be weeded out by the ceaseless round of dynastic power
struggles and coups detat which keep the aristocracy amused and in cases where Imperial interests are
directly threatened we can always turn to the Officio Assassinorum . 

all I cared because her voice was extraordinary . She was singing old sentimental
favourites like The Night Before You Left and The Love We Share and even an old cynic
like me could appreciate the emotion she put into them and feel that just this once
the trite words were ringing true . Snatches of her husky contralto carried through the
room wherever I was cutting through the backbiting and the small talk and I felt my
eyes drifting in her direction every time the crowd parted enough to afford me a view . 
And the view was well worth it . She was tail and slim with shoulder length hair of a
shade of blonde Ive never seen on anyone else before or since hanging loose to frame
a face which nearly stopped my heart . Her eyes were the hazy blue of a far horizon
and seemed to transfix me whenever I looked in her direction . Her dress was the same
colour almost exactly and clung to her figure like mist . 
Now Ive never believed in sentimental nonsense like love at first sight but I can say
without a word of a lie that even now after almost a century I can close my eyes and
picture her as she was then and hear those songs as though shes still in the same
room . 
But I wasnt there to listen to cabaret singers however enchanting so I tried my best
to mingle and pick up whatever gossip I could that would help us fight the tau if we
had to and keep me out of it if at all possible . 
So youre the famous Commissar Cain someone said passing me a fresh drink . I took
it automatically turning a little to use my right hand and emphasize the sling and
found myself looking at a narrow faced fellow in an expensive but understated robe
which positively screamed diplomat . He glanced at the sling . I hear you nearly started
the war early . 
Not from choice I can assure you . I said . Just defending an officer who lacked the
self restraint to ignore a blatant piece of sedition . 
I see . He eyed me narrowly trying to size me up . I kept my expression neutral . I take
it your self restraint is a little stronger . 
At the moment I said choosing my words with care were still at peace with the tau . 
The internal situation here is Ill admit a little disturbing but unless the Guard is
ordered to intervene thats purely a matter for the Arbites the PDF and His
Excellency I nodded at Grice who was listening to Kasteen explain the best way of
disembowelling a termagant with every sign of interest although his retinue of
sycophants was beginning to look a little green around the gills . Im not averse to
fighting if I have to but thats a decision for wiser heads than mine to take . 
I see . He nodded and stuck out a hand for me to shake . After a moments juggling
more to put him off balance than anything I transferred the glass to my other hand and
took it . Erasmus Donali Imperial Envoy . 
I thought as much . I smiled in return . You have the look of a diplomat about you . 
Whereas you seem quite exceptional for a soldier . Donali sipped his drink and I
followed suit finding it a very pleasant vintage . Most of them cant wait for the
shooting to start . 
Theyre Imperial Guard I said . They live to fight for the Emperor . Im a commissar 

Im supposed to consider the bigger picture . 
Which includes avoiding combat . You surprise me . 
As I said before I told him thats not my decision to make . But if people like you
can solve the conflict by negotiation and keep troopers who would have died here
alive to fight another enemy another day and maybe tip the balance in a more
important battle then it seems to me that youre serving the best interests of the
Imperium . And keeping my skin whole into the bargain of course which was far
more important to me . Donali looked surprised and a little gratified . 
I can see your reputation is far from exaggerated he said . And I hope I can oblige
you . But it may not be easy . 
That wasnt what I wanted to hear you can be sure . But I shrugged and sipped my
drink . 
As the Emperor wills I said a phrase Id picked up from Jurgen over the course of
our long association . Of course when he says it he means every word from me its just
the verbal equivalent of a shrug . Ive never really bought the idea that His Divine
Majesty can spare some attention from the job of preventing the entire galaxy from
sliding into damnation to look out for my interests too or anyone elses for that
matter which is why Im so diligent about doing it for myself . The difficulty I take it
being the public support for the tau in certain quarters . 
Exactly . My new friend nodded gloomily . For which you can thank the imbecile over
there talking to your colonel . He indicated Grice with a tilt of his head . He got so
carried away counting his bribes from the likes of him÷ another tilt of the head to the
far corner of the room that he hardly even noticed his planet slipping out from under
him . 
I turned in the direction hed indicated . A cadaverous hawk nosed individual dressed
in unwise scarlet hose and a burgundy tabard was holding forth to a knot of the local
aristocracy . Flanking him were a couple of servants in livery who looked about as
comfortable as an ork in evening dress hired guns if Id ever seen them . A scribe
hovered next to him making notes . 
One of the rogue traders weve heard so much about I said . Donali shrugged . 
So he says . But no one here is entirely what they seem commissar . You can certainly
depend on that . 
Well he was right on the money so far as I was concerned . So I exchanged a few more
inconsequential words and resumed circulating . After a few more conversations with
local dignitaries whose names I never quite caught my glass was in need of
replenishment and I headed towards the table at the far end of the room where an
enticing display of delicacies had been laid out . On the way I noticed Kasteen had
managed to extricate herself from the governors presence and was working the room
as though shed been a habitue of high society since she could walk . The air of
confidence she now radiated was remarkable especially set against her earlier
nervousness but the ability to seem calm and in control whatever the circumstances is
a vital quality in a leader and for all I knew she was shamming it as shamelessly as I 

was . It certainly looked as though she was enjoying herself though and I gave her a
light hearted salute as our eyes briefly met . She responded with a flashing grin and
whirled away towards the dance floor with a couple of aristocratic fops in tow . 
It looks like youve lost your date a voice said behind me . I turned and found myself
falling into the wide blue eyes of the singer Id been watching before . 
Uncharacteristically for me I was momentarily at a loss for words . She was smiling a
plate of finger food in her hand . 
Shes ah just a colleague I said . A fellow officer . Nothing like that between us . 
Strictly against regulations for one thing . And anyway were not
She laughed a warm smoky chuckle which warmed me like amasec and I realised
she was pulling my leg . 
I know she said . No time for romance in the Imperial Guard . It must be grim for
you . 
We have our duty to the Emperor I said . For a soldier thats enough . Its the sort of
thing I usually say and most civilians lap it up but my beautiful singer was looking at
me quizzically the ghost of a smile quirking at the corner of her mouth and I
suddenly got the feeling that she could see right through me to the core of deceit and
self interest I normally keep concealed from the world . It was an unnerving sensation . 
For some maybe . But I think theres more to you than meets the eye . She picked up a
bottle from the nearby table with her free hand and topped up my glass . 
Theres more to everyone than meets the eye I said more to deflect the conversation
than anything else . She smiled again . 
Thats very astute commissar . She extended a hand slim and cool to the touch the
middle finger ornamented with a large and finely wrought ring of unusual
workmanship . Evidently she was extremely successful in her profession or had at
least one wealthy admirer I would have laid money on both . I kissed it formally as
etiquette demanded and to my astonishment she giggled . 
A gentleman as well as an officer . You are full of surprises . Then she surprised me by
dropping a curtsey in imitation of the bovine debutantes surrounding us the light of
mischief in her dazzling eyes . Im Amberley Vail by the way . I sing a bit . 
I know I said . And very well too . She acknowledged the compliment with a tilt of
her head . I bowed formally entering into the game . Ciaphas Cain I said at your
service . Currently attached to the Valhallan 597th . Her eyes widened a little as I
introduced myself . 
Ive heard of you she said a little breathlessly . Didnt you fight the genestealers on
Keffia . Well I had if you count hanging around drinking recaf while the artillery unit I
was with dropped shells on the biggest concentrations of stealers we could find from
kloms away as fighting . Id been in at the death so to speak and emerged with a great
deal of the credit more by luck than good judgement . It was one of the early incidents
that had laid the foundations of my undeserved reputation for heroism but my
misadventures since had tended to overshadow what most of the galaxy still regarded as
a minor incident on a backwater agriworld . 

Not entirely alone I said slipping easily into the modest hero demeanour I could
adopt without thinking . There was an Imperial battlefleet in orbit at the time . 
And two full divisions of Imperial Guard on planet . She laughed again at my
astonished expression . I have relatives in Skandaburg . 
 Youre still talked about back there . 
I cant think why I said . I was just doing my job . 
Of course . Amberley nodded and again I got the feeling that she wasnt fooled for a
moment . Youre an Imperial commissar . Duty before everything right . 
Absolutely I said . And right now I think its my duty to ask you to dance . It was a
transparent attempt to change the subject which I hoped shed put down to modest
embarrassment and I half expected her to refuse . But she smiled discarding her plate
of half eaten delicacies and took my uninjured arm . 
Id love to she said . Ive a few minutes before my second set . 
So we drifted across to the dance floor and I spent a very pleasant few minutes with
her head on my shoulder as we spun around to an old waltz I never learned the name
of . Kasteen galloped past a couple of times a different swain in tow on each occasion
raising an eyebrow in a way which forewarned me of some relentless leg pulling on
our drive back to the compound but just at that moment I couldnt have cared less . 
Eventually Amberley pulled away with what seemed like reluctance unless I was
succumbing to wishful thinking and began to return to the stage . I walked with her
chatting to no purpose intent simply on prolonging a pleasant interlude in what
otherwise promised to be a dull evening and it was thus that I noticed a quiet
vehement altercation between Grice and the hawk faced rogue trader . 
Do you know who that is . I asked not really expecting an answer but it seemed my
companion was well versed in the intricacies of Gravalaxian politics . It came with
performing for the aristocracy I supposed . She nodded looking surprised . 
His names Orelius . A rogue trader here to deal with the tau . So he says . The
qualification was delivered in precisely the same tone of scepticism as Donalis had
been and for some reason I found myself remembering Divass cloak and dagger
fantasies from our night in the Eagles Wing . 
Why do you say that . I asked . Amberley shrugged . 
The tau have been dealing with the same traders for more than a century . Orelius
arrived from nowhere a month or two ago and tried opening negotiations with them
through Grice . It may just be a coincidence but She shrugged her dress slipping
across her slim shoulders . 
Why now with the political situation destabilising . I asked . She nodded . 
It does seem a little unusual . 
Perhaps hes hoping to take advantage of the confusion to strike a better deal I said . 
Orelius turned on his heel as I watched and marched away trailed by his bodyguards . 
The provincial capital of the smaller of the Northern continents . Most of the action in the cleansing of
Keffia took place on the southern continent where the genestealer cult was most deeply entrenched so
Skandaburg and its population would have been relatively untouched by the fighting . 

Grice was pale and sweating even more than usual and reached out to pluck a drink
from a nearby servitor with a trembling hand . Hes thrown a scare into our illustrious
governor at any event . 
Has he . Amberley watched him go . That seems a little presumptuous even for a
rogue trader . 
If thats what he really is . I said without thinking . Those depthless blue eyes turned
on me again . 
What else would he be . 
An inquisitor I said the idea taking firmer root in my head even as I said it . 
Amberleys eyes widened . 
An inquisitor . Here . Her voice became a little tremulous as though the enormity of
the idea were too huge to grasp . What makes you think that . 
The urge to impress her was almost irresistible I have to confess and if you could
only know how bewitching she was I know youd have felt the same . So I looked my
most commissarial . 
All I can say I told her lowering my voice for dramatic effect is that Ive heard from
a reliable military source which sounded a lot better than from a drunken idiot Im
sure youll agree that there are Inquisition agents active on Gravalax . 
Surely not . She shook her head blonde tresses flying in confusion . And even if there
were why would you suspect Orelius . 
Well just look at him I said . Everyone knows that undercover inquisitors disguise
themselves as rogue traders most of the time1
 . Its by far the easiest way of travelling
incognito with the rabble of hangers on they all seem to attract . 
You could be right she said with a delicate shiver . But its no concern of ours . 
Well I couldnt agree more of course but thats not what my heroic reputation leads
people to expect of me so I put on my best dutiful expression and said The security
of the Imperium is the concern of all of His Majestys loyal servants . Well thats true
too and it lets me out but no one needs to know that . Amberley nodded sombrely
and trotted back to the stage and I watched her go cursing myself for an idiot for
puncturing the mood . 
As youll no doubt appreciate the rest of the evening promised to be anticlimactic so I
drifted back to the food and drink . Our rations back at the compound were adequate
enough but I wasnt going to pass up the opportunity to savour a few delicacies while
they were there for the taking and it was as good a vantage point as any to enjoy
Amberleys performance from . It was also as Id learned from uncountable similar
affairs the best spot from which to cull gossip since everyone gravitated there sooner
or later . 
Thus it was that I made the acquaintance of Orelius without the faintest presentiment
of the trouble that innocent conversation would lead to . 
It is indeed regrettable that this predilection has become so widely known . Personally I blame popular
fiction for perpetuating the stereotype although it has to be said that some inquisitors are simply woefully
lacking in imagination when required to adopt a disguise . 

If anything I suppose it was the sling that was to blame . It had seemed a good idea at
the time but now I came to fill a plate the damn thing got in the way preventing me
from reaching out for the palovine pastries perched on the opposite side of the table . If
I transferred the plate to my left hand I was turned awkwardly my centre of mass
shifted so I still couldnt reach . I was trying to work out a way of getting to them
when a thin arm reached across to pick up the dish . 
Allow me . The voice was dry and cultured . I transferred a couple of the delicacies to
my plate and found myself addressing the man Id almost convinced myself was an
inquisitorial agent . It was ridiculous of course but still÷
Thank you sieur Orelius I said . Youre most kind . 
Have we met . His eyes were shadowed the irises were almost black and had an
unnerving piercing quality that increased his resemblance to a bird of prey . 
Your reputation precedes you I said blandly letting him make of that what he would . 
I dont mind admitting I was less relaxed than I tried to look . If he really was an
inquisitor there was a good chance he was a psyker too and might know me for what I
was but Id encountered mindreaders before and knew that they werent as formidable
as most people thought . Most of them can only read surface thoughts and I was so
long practiced at dissembling that I did so without any conscious awareness of the fact . 
Im sure it does . He was an old hand at this game too I realised an essential skill
whether his profession was as it appeared or as I had surmised . 
You seem to have the ear of His Excellency I said and the first momentary flicker of
emotion appeared on his face . Id got in under his guard it seemed . 
I have both . Unfortunately His Excellency appears to lack anything between them . 
He took one of the pastries for himself . Hes paralysed with indecision . 
Indecision about what . I asked ingenuously . 
Where his best interests lie . And those of his people of course . Orelius bit into the
delicacy as though it were Grices neck . Unless he starts showing some leadership
this world will go down in blood and burning . But he sits and vacillates and hopes it
will all go away . 
Then lets hope he comes to his senses soon I said . The keen eyes impaled me again . 
Indeed . His voice was level . For all our sakes . He smiled then without warmth . The
Emperor be with you Commissar Cain . My surprise must have shown on my face
because the smile widened a fraction . Your reputation precedes you too . 
And then he was gone leaving me curiously troubled . I didnt have long to dwell on
my unease though because the flunkey whod announced our arrival was back
looking a little flustered . Hed called out a number of names since Kasteen and I had
made our entrance but it was clear that this time he expected to be listened to . He
pounded a staff on the polished wooden floor and the babble of voices gradually
diminished Amberleys trailed away in mid chorus which was a real shame . The
flunkeys chest inflated with self importance . 
Your Excellency . My lords ladies and gentlemen . Oran Shuisassai Ambassador of
the tau . 
And for the first time since arriving on Gravalax I was face to face with the enemy . 

ONE THING ILL say for the tau they certainly know how to make an impressive
entrance . Shuisassai was draped in a simple white robe which made all the Imperial
dignitaries look ridiculously overdressed and was surrounded by others of his kind
similarly attired . There was no mistaking who was in charge though as his charisma
filled the room his entourage bobbing in his wake as he strode confidently across the
polished wooden floor towards Grice like seabirds around a fishing boat . I didnt realise
at the time how apt the mental image was of course1
 . What I did notice almost at once
was the bluish cast of his skin and that of his compatriots which Id been led to
expect from Divass gossip and the various reports Id read . What I hadnt expected
was the single braid that grew from his otherwise hairless skull plaited and
ornamented with ribbons in a variety of colours which contrasted vividly with the
plain simplicity of his garment . The meaning of the bizarre hairstyle sported by their
human dupes which Id noted many times since our landing thus became clear to me
along with the face paint the leader of the street gang had worn and I found myself
suppressing a shiver of unease . If so many citizens had been influenced so openly by
these alien interlopers the situation was dire indeed and my chances of keeping well
away from trouble problematic at best . 
It reminded me of something else too and after a moment I recalled the decoration
Gorok the kroot had applied to the quills on his head . Clearly the races of the tau
empire saw nothing wrong in absorbing the mores and fashions of one anothers
cultures eroding their very identities in the name of their union a notion any loyal
Imperial citizen would have regarded with as much horror as I did . Id seen at first
hand what happened when traitors and heretics abandoned their humanity to follow
the twisted teachings of Chaos and the thought of how fertile a soil the warp spawned
abominations would find the Imperium if it were ever to become as unwittingly open
to alien influence as the tau and their dupes chilled my very soul . Shuisassais flunkies
also had their single tail of hair ornamented though slightly less flamboyantly and I
found myself wondering if the pattern denoted some subtle graduations of status
among them or were merely intended to be decorative . 
Smug little grox fondler . Donali was at my elbow again the words delivered through
almost motionless lips as he made brief eye contact with the xeno and raised his
wineglass in greeting . He thinks hes got the whole planet sewn up . 
And does he . I asked more out of politeness than actually expecting an answer . 
Not yet . Donali watched as the xeno delegation made its ritual greeting to Grice . But
hes certainly got the governor in his pocket . 
The ambassador like all tau diplomats would be one of the Water caste . 

Are you sure about that . I asked . Donali must have detected something in my
intonation because his attention switched to me at once a sensation I found mildly
disconcerting . 
You suspect he might be under÷ other influences . he suggested watching my face
for a flicker of reaction . Well good luck to him a lifetime of dissembling had left me
virtually impossible to read in that way . I indicated Orelius with a tilt of my head he
was watching the exchange between Grice and the tau diplomat warily trying not to
look as though he was paying it any attention . 
Our rogue trader friend had quite a conversation with His Excellency earlier this
evening I said . And neither of them seem terribly happy about it . 
Youve spoken to Orelius . Once again I found myself in the middle of a verbal
fencing match . Emperors bowels I thought irritably doesnt anyone around here ever
say what they mean . 
We exchanged a few words I said shrugging . He seems to think the shootings about
to start
The bark of a bolt pistol going off echoed around the ballroom and I dived for cover
behind an overstuffed sofa even before the rational part of my mind had identified the
source of the sound . I may not be a paragon of virtue but I like to think my survival
instincts more than makes up for any moral shortcomings I might possess . 
Donali stood gaping as the room erupted in panic and screams . Half the guests
started running in no particular direction while the others stared around themselves in
half witted stupefaction . Priceless crystal goblets shattered underfoot as drinks were
dropped and swords were unsheathed and every kind of sidearm imaginable suddenly
appeared in hands on every side . 
Treachery . one of the tau shrieked glaring around itself and drawing some kind of
handgun from the recesses of its robes . Shuisassai was down thick purple blood
everywhere and I knew from experience that he wouldnt be getting up again . 
The bolter round had exploded inside his chest cavity redecorating the immediate
vicinity with tau viscera which I was mildly intrigued to note was darker in colour
than the human equivalent something to do with the colour of their skin I assumed . 
Kasteen . I activated the combead in my ear . Where are you . 
Over by the stage . I lifted my head scanning the room and located her as she
scrambled up next to Amberley who was gazing at the crowd as though mesmerised . 
Did you see where the shot came from . 
No . She hesitated a fraction of a second . My attention was elsewhere . Sorry
commissar . 
No need to be I said . You werent to know this was going to turn into a warzone . In
truth that looked uncomfortably like what was happening . Practically everyone with a
ceremonial sidearm had drawn it in a panic stricken reflex except for Kasteen and
myself and was looking for someone to use it on . Which meant identifying the
assassin would be virtually impossible by now . 
Is this how you respond to proposals of peace . The gun waving tau was
getting hysterical swinging the weapon wildly . It was only a matter of seconds I thought
before he pulled the trigger or more likely someone else shot him before he had the
chance . Either way it was going to start a massacre and I had no intention of getting
caught in the middle of it . I voxed . Jurgen . Were leaving now . There may be resistance . 
Sir . Jurgens voice was as phlegmatic as ever . 
Commissar . Lustigs was inflected with the query he was too well trained to ask . But
I wasnt about to let the honour guard blunder into a firefight without warning . I was
going to need them if I expected to get out of here . 
The tau ambassador has just been assassinated I said . Then I cursed my own
stupidity . The channel wasnt secured which meant every listening post on both sides
had probably picked up my transmission . Oh well too late to worry about that now . 
My main priority was getting the hell out of here in one piece . Unfortunately that
meant getting past the tau delegation which looked like it was becoming a fire magnet
for every Imperial hothead in the room . 
There was only one thing for it . With a curious sense of d»já vu I strode forwards my
hands held out from my sides away from my weapons . 
Please bear in mind that barely a minute had passed by this time and the room was
far from silent . Practically everyone was shouting at everyone else and no one was
listening . The rest of the tau were babbling away in their own language . It sounded
like frying grox steaks to me but the gist of it was obviously put that bloody thing
away before you get us all shot and the other guests were screaming drop it . at him
and each other . I realised that with the tangle of competing factions and interests in the
room there would be a complete bloodbath the moment anyone pulled a trigger . 
Which was probably what the assassin was counting on to cover his tracks . 
Colonel . With me . Kasteen could cover my back at least . I saw her slip off the stage
and start towards me through the milling mob Amberley had already disappeared
sensible girl . 
You . You did this . The tau stuck the muzzle of his curiously featureless pistol under
Grices chin . The governor seemed to lose even more colour if that were possible and
spluttered incoherently . 
Thats ridiculous . What would I have to gain
More lies . The tau shrugged off the restraining hands of his colleagues . The truth or
you die . 
This does not advance the greater good I said echoing the words of the kroot . I
wasnt quite sure what they meant but I hoped they had more resonance for the tau
than yet another variation on put it down before I shoot you which didnt seem to be
having much effect . 
It worked better than Id dared to hope . Every tau in the group including the maniac
with the gun stared at me with something I took to be astonishment . 