One of the first things you learn as a commissar is that people are never pleased to
see you something thats no longer the case where Im concerned of course now that
my glorious and undeserved reputation precedes me wherever I go. A good rule of
thumb in my younger days but Id never found myself staring down death in the eyes
of the troopers I was supposed to be inspiring with loyalty to the Emperor before. In
my early years as an occasionally loyal minion of his Glorious Majesty Id faced or to
be more accurate ran away screaming from orks necrons tyranids and a severely
hacked off daemon host just to pick out some of the highlights of my ignominious
career. But standing in that mess room a heartbeat away from being ripped apart by
mutinous Guardsmen was a unique experience and one that I have no wish to repeat.
I should have realised how bad the situation was when the commanding officer of my
new regiment actually smiled at me as I stepped off the shuttle. I already had every
reason to fear the worst of course but by that time I was out of options. Paradoxical
as it might seem taking this miserable assignment had looked uncomfortably like the
best chance I had of keeping my precious skin in one piece.
The problem of course was my undeserved reputation for heroism which by that
time had grown to such ludicrous proportions that the Commissariat had finally
noticed me and decided that my talents were being wasted in the artillery unit Id
picked as the safest place to sit out my lifetime of service to the Emperor a long way
away from the sharp end of combat. Accordingly Id found myself plucked from a
position of relative obscurity and attached directly to Brigade headquarters.
That hadnt seemed too bad at first as Id had little to do except shuffle datafiles and
organise the occasional firing squad which had suited me fine but the trouble with
everybody thinking youre a hero is that they tend to assume you like being in mortal
danger and go out of their way to provide some. In the half dozen years since my
arrival Id been temporarily seconded to units assigned among other things to assault
fixed positions clear out a space hulk and run recon deep behind enemy lines. And
every time Id made it back alive due in no small part to my natural talent for diving
for cover and waiting for the noise to stop the general staff had patted me on the head,
given me another commendation and tried to find an even more inventive way of
getting me killed.
Something obviously had to be done and done fast before my luck ran out altogether.
So as I often had before I let my reputation do the work for me and put in a request
for a transfer back to a regiment. Any regiment. By that time I just didnt care. Long
experience had taught me that the opportunities for taking care of my own neck were much higher when I could pull rank on every officer around me.
I just dont think Im cut out for data shuffling I said apologetically to the weaselfaced
little runt from the lord generals office. He nodded judiciously and made a
show of paging through my file.
I cant say Im surprised he said in a slightly nasal whine. Although he tried to look
cool and composed his body language betrayed his excitement at being in the
presence of a living legend: at least thats what some damn fool pictcast commentator
had called me after the Siege of Perlia and the appellation stuck. The next thing I
know my own face is grinning at me from recruiting posters all over the sector and I
couldnt even grab a mug of recaf without having a piece of paper shoved under my
nose with a request to autograph it. It doesnt suit everybody.
Its a shame we cant all have your dedication to the smooth running of the Imperium.
I said. He looked sharply at me for a moment wondering if I was taking the frak,
which of course I was then decided I was simply being civil. I decided to ladle it on a
bit. But Im afraid Ive been a soldier too long to start changing my habits now.
That was the sort of thing Cain the Hero was supposed to say of course and weaselface
lapped it up. He took my transfer request from me as though it was a relic from
one of the blessed saints.
Ill handle it personally he said practically bowing as he showed me out.
AND SO IT was a month or so later I found myself in a shuttle approaching the hangar
bay of the Righteous Wrath a battered old troopship identical to thousands in Imperial
service almost all of which I sometimes think Ive travelled on over the years. The
familiar smell of shipboard air stale recycled inextricably intertwined with rancid
sweat machine oil and boiled cabbage hissed into the passenger compartment as the
hatch seals opened. I inhaled it gratefully as it displaced the no less familiar odour of
Gunner Jurgen my aide almost since the outset of my commissarial career nearly
twenty years before.
Short for a Valhallan Jurgen somehow managed to look awkward and out of place
wherever he was and in all our time together I couldnt recall a single occasion on
which hed ever worn anything that appeared to fit properly. Though amiable enough
in temperament he seemed ill at ease with people and in turn most preferred to
avoid his company: a tendency no doubt exacerbated by the perpetual psoriasis that
afflicted him as well as his body odour which in all honesty took quite a bit of
getting used to.
Nevertheless hed proven an able and valued aide due in no small part to his peculiar
mentality. Not overly bright but eager to please and doggedly literal in his approach
to following orders hed become a useful buffer between me and some of the more
onerous aspects of my job. He never questioned anything I said or did apparently
convinced that it must be for the good of the Imperium in some way which given the
occasionally discreditable activities Id been known to indulge in was a great deal
more than I could have hoped for from any other trooper. Even after all this time I still 
find myself missing him on occasion.
So he was right there at my side half hidden by our combined luggage which hed
somehow contrived to gather up and hold despite the weight as my boot heels first
rang on the deck plating beneath the shuttle. I didnt object experience had taught me
that it was a good idea for people meeting him for the first time to get the full picture
in increments.
I paused fractionally for dramatic effect before striding forward to meet the small knot
of Guard officers drawn up to greet me by the main cargo doors the clang of my
footsteps on the metal sounding as crisp and authoritative as I could contrive an effect
undercut slightly by the pops and clangs from the scorched area under the shuttle
engines as it cooled and Jurgens tottering gait behind me.
Welcome commissar. This is a great honour. A surprisingly young woman with red
hair and blue eyes stepped forward and snapped a crisp salute with parade ground
efficiency. I thought for a moment that I was being subtly snubbed with only the
junior officers present before I reconciled her face with the file picture in the briefing
slate. I returned the salute.
Colonel Kasteen. I nodded an acknowledgement. Despite having no objection to
being fawned over by young women in the normal course of events I found such a
transparent attempt at ingratiation a little nauseating. Then I got a good look at her
hopeful expression and felt as though Id stepped on a nonexistent final stair. She was
absolutely sincere. Emperor help me they really were pleased to see me. Things must
be even worse here than Id imagined.
Just how bad they actually were I had yet to discover but I already had some
presentiment. For one thing the palms of my hands were tingling which always
means theres trouble hanging in the air like the static before a storm and for another,
Id broken with the habit of a lifetime and actually read the briefing slate carefully on
the tedious voyage out here to meet the ship.
To cut a long story short morale in the Valhallan 296th301st was at rock bottom and
the root cause of it all was obvious from the regiments title. Combining belowstrength
regiments was standard practice among the Imperial Guard a sensible way of
consolidating after combat losses to keep units up to strength and of further use in the
field. What hadnt been sensible was combining what was left of the 301st a crack
planetary assault unit with fifteen hundred years of traditional belief in their innate
superiority over every other unit in the Guard particularly the other Valhallan ones,
with the 296th a rear echelon garrison command which just to throw promethium on
the flames was one of the few all women regiments raised and maintained by that
desolate iceball. And just to put the cherry on it Kasteen had been given overall
command by virtue of three days seniority over her new immediate subordinate a
man with far more combat experience.
Not that any of them truly lacked that now after the battle for Corania. The tyranids
had attacked without warning and every Guard regiment on the planet had been
forced to resist ferociously for nearly a year before the navy and a couple of Astartes 
Chapters had arrived to turn the tide. By that time every surviving unit had sustained
at least fifty per cent casualties many of them a great deal more and the bureaucrats
of the Munitorium had begun the process of consolidating the battered survivors into
useful units once again.
On paper at least. No one with any practical military experience would have been so
half witted as to ignore the morale effects of their decisions. But thats bureaucrats for
you. Maybe if a few more Administratum drones were given lasguns and told to
soldier alongside the troopers for a month or two it would shake their ideas up a bit.
Assuming by some miracle they werent shot in the back on the first day of course.
But Im digressing. I returned Kasteens salute noting as I did so the faint
discolouration of the fabric beneath her rank insignia where her captains studs had
been before her recent unanticipated elevation to colonel. There had been few officers
left in either regiment by the time the nids had got through with them and theyd
been lucky at that. At least one of the newly consolidated units was being led by a
former corporal or so Id heard.
 Unfortunately neither of their commissars had
survived so thanks to my fortuitously timed transfer request Id been handed the job
of sorting out the mess. Lucky me.
Major Broklaw my second in command. Kasteen introduced the man next to her his
own insignia equally new. His face flushed almost imperceptibly but he stepped
forward to shake my hand with a firm grip. His eyes were flint grey beneath his dark
fringe of hair and he closed his hand a little too tightly trying to gauge my strength.
Two could play at that game of course and I had the advantage of a couple of
augmetic fingers so I returned the favour smiling blandly as the colour drained from
his face.
Major. I let him go before anything was damaged except his pride and turned to the
next officer in line. Kasteen had rounded up pretty much her entire senior command
staff as protocol demanded but it was clear most of them werent too sure about
having me around. Only a few met my eyes but the legend of Cain the Hero had
arrived here before me and the ones that did were obviously hoping Id be able to turn
round a situation they all patently felt had gone way beyond their own ability to deal
with.
I dont know what the rest were thinking: they were probably just relieved I wasnt
talking about shooting the lot of them and bringing in somebody competent. Of
course if that had been a realistic option I might have considered it but I had an unwanted reputation for honesty and fairness to live up to so that was that.
The introductions over I turned back to Kasteen and indicated the tottering pile of
kitbags behind me. Her eyes widened fractionally as she caught a glimpse of Jurgens
face behind the barricade but I suppose anyone whod gone hand to hand with
tyranids would have found the experience relatively unperturbing and she masked it
quickly. Most of the assembled officers I noted with well concealed amusement were
now breathing shallowly through their mouths.
My aide Gunner First Class Ferik Jurgen. I said. In truth there was only one grade of
gunner but I didnt expect theyd know that and the small unofficial promotion would
add to whatever kudos he got from being the aide of a commissar. Which in turn
would reflect well on me. Perhaps you could assign him some quarters?
Of course. She turned to one of the youngest lieutenants a blonde girl of vaguely
equine appearance who looked as if shed be more at home on a farm somewhere than
in uniform and nodded. Sulla. Get the quartermaster to sort it out.
Ill do it myself she replied slightly overdoing the eager young officer routine.
Magils doing his best but hes not quite on top of the system yet. Kasteen nodded
blandly unaware of any problem but I could see Broklaws jaw tighten and noticed
that most of the men present failed to mask their displeasure.
Sulla was our quartermaster sergeant until the last round of promotions Kasteen
explained. She knows the ships resources better than anyone.
Im sure she does I said diplomatically. And Im sure she has far more pressing
duties to perform than finding a bunk for Jurgen. Well liaise with your Sergeant Magil
ourselves if you have no objection.
None at all. Kasteen looked slightly puzzled for a moment then dismissed it.
Broklaw I noticed from the corner of my eye was looking at me with something
approaching respect now. Well that was something at least. But it was pretty clear I
was going to have my work cut out to turn this divided and demoralised rabble into
anything resembling a fighting unit.
Well up to a point anyway. If they were a long way from being ready to fight the
enemies of the Emperor they were certainly in good enough shape to fight among
themselves as I was shortly to discover.
I havent reached my second century by ignoring the little presentiments of trouble
which sometimes appear out of nowhere like those itching palms of mine or the little
voice in the back of my head which tells me something seems too good to be true. But
in my first few days aboard the Righteous Wrath I had no need of such subtle
promptings from my subconscious. Tension hung in the air of the corridors assigned
to us like ozone around a daemonhost all but striking sparks from the bulkheads. And
I wasnt the only one to feel it. None of the other regiments on board would venture
into our part of the ship either for social interaction or the time honoured tradition of
perpetrating practical jokes against the members of another unit. The naval provosts
patrolled in tense wary groups. Desperate for some kind of respite I even made
courtesy calls on the other commissars aboard but these were far from convivial 
Sandy Mitchell 
humourless Emperor botherers to a man the younger ones were too overwhelmed by
respect for my reputation to be good company and most of the older ones were
quietly resentful of what they saw as a glory hogging young upstart. Tedious as these
interludes were though I was to be grateful for them sooner than I thought.
The one bright spot was Captain Parjita whod commanded the vessel for the past
thirty years and with whom I hit it off from our first dinner together. Im sure he only
invited me the first time because protocol demanded it and perhaps out of curiosity to
see what a Hero of the Imperium actually looked like in the flesh but by the time we
were halfway through the first course we were chatting away like old friends. I told a
few outrageous lies about my past adventures and he reciprocated with some
anecdotes of his own and by the time wed got onto the amasec I felt more relaxed
than I had in months. For one thing he really appreciated the problems I was facing
with Kasteen and her rabble.
You need to reassert some discipline he told me unnecessarily. Before the rot
spreads any further. Shoot a few thatll buck their ideas up.
Easy to say of course but not so easy in practice. Thats what most commissars would
have done admittedly but getting a regiment united because theyre terrified of you
and hate your guts has its own drawbacks particularly as youre going to find yourself
in the middle of a battlefield with these people before very long and theyll all have
guns. And as Ive already said I had a reputation to maintain and a good part of that
was keeping up the pretence that I actually gave a damn about the troopers under my
command. So not an option unfortunately.
It was while I was on my way back to my quarters from one such pleasant evening
that my hand was forced and in a way I could well have done without.
IT WAS THE noise that alerted me at first a gradually swelling babble of voices from
the corridors leading to our section of the ship. My pleasantly reflective mood,
enhanced by Parjitas amasec and a comfortable win over the regicide board,
evaporated in an instant. I knew that sound all too well and the clatter of boots on the
deck behind me as a squad of provosts double timed towards the disturbance with
shock batons drawn was enough to confirm it. I picked up my pace to join them,
falling in beside the section leader.
Sounds like a riot. I said. The blank visored head nodded.
Quite right sir.
Any idea what sparked it? Not that it mattered. The simmering resentment among the
Valhallans was almost cause enough on its own. Any excuse would have done. If he
did have a clue I never got to hear it as we arrived at the door of the mess hall a
ceramic cup bearing the regimental crest of the 296th shattered against his helmet.
Emperors blood! I ducked reflexively taking cover behind the nearest piece of
furniture to assess the situation while the provosts waded in ahead of me striking out
with their shock batons at any target that presented itself. The room was a heaving
mass of angry men and women punching kicking and flailing at one another all 
Sandy Mitchell 
semblance of discipline shot to hell. Several were down already bleeding screaming,
being trampled on by the still active combatants and the casualties were rising all the
time.
The fiercest fighting was going on in the centre of the room a small knot of brawlers
clearly intent on actual murder unless someone intervened. Fine by me thats what the
provosts were for. I hunkered down behind an overturned table scanning the room as
I voxed a situation report to Kasteen and watched them battle their way forward. The
two fighters at the centre of the melee seemed evenly matched to me a shaven headed
man muscled like a Catachan who towered over a wiry young woman with shortcropped
raven black hair. Whatever advantage he had in strength she could match in
agility striking hard and leaping back out of range reducing most of his strikes to
glancing blows which is just as well as a clean hit from those ham like fists would
likely have stove her ribcage in. As I watched he spun launching a lethal roundhouse
kick to her temple she ducked just a fraction slow and went sprawling as his foot
grazed the top of her head but twisted upright again with a knife from one of the
tables in her hand. The blow came up towards his sternum but he blocked it opening
up a livid red gash along his right arm.
It was about then that things really started to go wrong. The provosts had made it
almost halfway to the brawl I was watching when the two sides finally realised they
had an enemy in common. A young woman blood pouring from a broken nose was
unceremoniously yanked away from the man whose groin shed been aiming a kick at,
and rounded on the provost attempting to restrain her. Her elbow strike bounced
harmlessly off his torso armour but her erstwhile opponent leapt to her defence,
swinging a broken plate in a short clinical arc which impacted precisely on the neck
joint where helmet met flak: a bright crimson spurt of arterial blood sprayed the
surrounding bystanders as the stricken provost dropped to his knees trying to stem the
bleeding.
Emperors bowels! I began to edge my way back towards the door to wait for the
reinforcements Kasteen had promised: if they hadnt been before the mob was in a
killing mood now and anyone who looked like a symbol of authority would become
an obvious target. Even as I watched both factions turned on the provosts in their
midst who disappeared under a swarm of bodies. The troopers barely seemed human
any more. Id seen tyranids move like that in response to a perceived threat but this
was even worse. Your average nid swarm has purpose and intelligence behind
everything it does even though its hard to remember that when a tidal wave of chitin
is bearing down on you with every intention of reducing you to mincemeat but it was
clear that there was no intelligence working here just sheer brute blood lust. Emperor
damn it Ive seen Khornate cults with more self restraint than those supposedly
disciplined Guard troopers displayed in that mess hall.
At least while they were ripping the provosts apart they werent likely to notice me so
I made what progress I could towards the door ready to take command of the
reinforcements as soon as they arrived. And I would have made it too if the squad 
Sandy Mitchell 
leader hadnt surfaced long enough to scream Commissar! Help!
Oh great. Every pair of eyes in the room suddenly swung in my direction. I thought I
could see my reflection in every pupil tracking me like an auspex.
If you take one more step towards that door I told myself youre a dead man. Theyd
be on me in seconds. The only way to survive was to take them by surprise. So I
stepped forward instead as though Id just entered the room.
You. I pointed at a random trooper. Get a broom.
Whatever theyd been expecting me to say or do this definitely wasnt it. The room
hung suspended in confused anticipation the silence stretching for an infinite second.
No one moved.
That was not a request I said raising my voice a little and taking another step
forward. This mess hall is an absolute disgrace. And no one is leaving until its been
tidied up. My boot skidded in a slowly congealing pool of blood. You you and you,
go with him. Buckets and mops. Make sure you get enough to go round. Confusion
and uncertainty began to spread troopers flicking nervous glances at one other as it
gradually began to dawn on them that the situation had got well out of hand and that
consequences had to be faced. The Guardsmen Id pointed out two of them women,
began to edge nervously towards the door.
At the double! I barked suddenly with my best parade ground snap the designated
troopers scurried out ingrained patterns of discipline reasserting themselves.
And that was enough. The thunderstorm crackle of violence dissipated from the room
as though suddenly earthed.
After that it was easy now that Id asserted my authority the rest fell into line as meek
as you please and by the time Kasteen arrived with another squad of provosts in tow
Id already detailed a few more to escort the wounded and worse to the infirmary. A
surprising number were able to walk but there were still far too many stretcher cases
for my liking.
You did well I hear. Kasteen was at my elbow her face pale as she surveyed the
damage. I shrugged knowing from long experience that credit snowballs all the faster
the less you seem to want it.
Not well enough for some of these poor souls I said.
Bravest thing I ever saw I heard from behind me as one of the injured provosts was
helped away by a couple of his shipmates. He just stood there and faced them down,
the whole damn lot. His voice faded adding another small increment to my heroic
reputation which I knew would be all round the ship by this time tomorrow.
Therell have to be an investigation. Kasteen looked stunned still not quite capable of
taking in the full enormity of what had happened. We need to know who started it,
what happened÷
Whos to blame? Broklaw cut in from the door. It was obvious from the direction of
his gaze where he thought the responsibility should lie. Kasteen flushed.
Ive no doubt well discover the men responsible she said a faint but perceptible
stress on the pronoun. Broklaw refused to rise to the bait.