one of the first things you learn as a commissar is that people are never pleased to
see you something thats no longer the case where im concerned of course now that
my glorious and undeserved reputation precedes me wherever i go . a good rule of
thumb in my younger days but id never found myself staring down death in the eyes
of the troopers i was supposed to be inspiring with loyalty to the emperor before . in
my early years as an occasionally loyal minion of his glorious majesty id faced or to
be more accurate ran away screaming from orks necrons tyranids and a severely
hacked off daemon host just to pick out some of the highlights of my ignominious
career . but standing in that mess room a heartbeat away from being ripped apart by
mutinous guardsmen was a unique experience and one that i have no wish to repeat . 
i should have realised how bad the situation was when the commanding officer of my
new regiment actually smiled at me as i stepped off the shuttle . i already had every
reason to fear the worst of course but by that time i was out of options . paradoxical
as it might seem taking this miserable assignment had looked uncomfortably like the
best chance i had of keeping my precious skin in one piece . 
the problem of course was my undeserved reputation for heroism which by that
time had grown to such ludicrous proportions that the commissariat had finally
noticed me and decided that my talents were being wasted in the artillery unit id
picked as the safest place to sit out my lifetime of service to the emperor a long way
away from the sharp end of combat . accordingly id found myself plucked from a
position of relative obscurity and attached directly to brigade headquarters . 
that hadnt seemed too bad at first as id had little to do except shuffle datafiles and
organise the occasional firing squad which had suited me fine but the trouble with
everybody thinking youre a hero is that they tend to assume you like being in mortal
danger and go out of their way to provide some . in the half dozen years since my
arrival id been temporarily seconded to units assigned among other things to assault
fixed positions clear out a space hulk and run recon deep behind enemy lines . and
every time id made it back alive due in no small part to my natural talent for diving
for cover and waiting for the noise to stop the general staff had patted me on the head
given me another commendation and tried to find an even more inventive way of
getting me killed . 
something obviously had to be done and done fast before my luck ran out altogether . 
so as i often had before i let my reputation do the work for me and put in a request
for a transfer back to a regiment . any regiment . by that time i just didnt care . long
experience had taught me that the opportunities for taking care of my own neck were 
much higher when i could pull rank on every officer around me . 
i just dont think im cut out for data shuffling i said apologetically to the weaselfaced
little runt from the lord generals office . he nodded judiciously and made a
show of paging through my file . 
i cant say im surprised he said in a slightly nasal whine . although he tried to look
cool and composed his body language betrayed his excitement at being in the
presence of a living legend at least thats what some damn fool pictcast commentator
had called me after the siege of perlia and the appellation stuck . the next thing i
know my own face is grinning at me from recruiting posters all over the sector and i
couldnt even grab a mug of recaf without having a piece of paper shoved under my
nose with a request to autograph it . it doesnt suit everybody . 
its a shame we cant all have your dedication to the smooth running of the imperium . 
i said . he looked sharply at me for a moment wondering if i was taking the frak
which of course i was then decided i was simply being civil . i decided to ladle it on a
bit . but im afraid ive been a soldier too long to start changing my habits now . 
that was the sort of thing cain the hero was supposed to say of course and weaselface
lapped it up . he took my transfer request from me as though it was a relic from
one of the blessed saints . 
ill handle it personally he said practically bowing as he showed me out . 
and so it was a month or so later i found myself in a shuttle approaching the hangar
bay of the righteous wrath a battered old troopship identical to thousands in imperial
service almost all of which i sometimes think ive travelled on over the years . the
familiar smell of shipboard air stale recycled inextricably intertwined with rancid
sweat machine oil and boiled cabbage hissed into the passenger compartment as the
hatch seals opened . i inhaled it gratefully as it displaced the no less familiar odour of
gunner jurgen my aide almost since the outset of my commissarial career nearly
twenty years before . 
short for a valhallan jurgen somehow managed to look awkward and out of place
wherever he was and in all our time together i couldnt recall a single occasion on
which hed ever worn anything that appeared to fit properly . though amiable enough
in temperament he seemed ill at ease with people and in turn most preferred to
avoid his company a tendency no doubt exacerbated by the perpetual psoriasis that
afflicted him as well as his body odour which in all honesty took quite a bit of
getting used to . 
nevertheless hed proven an able and valued aide due in no small part to his peculiar
mentality . not overly bright but eager to please and doggedly literal in his approach
to following orders hed become a useful buffer between me and some of the more
onerous aspects of my job . he never questioned anything i said or did apparently
convinced that it must be for the good of the imperium in some way which given the
occasionally discreditable activities id been known to indulge in was a great deal
more than i could have hoped for from any other trooper . even after all this time i still 

find myself missing him on occasion . 
so he was right there at my side half hidden by our combined luggage which hed
somehow contrived to gather up and hold despite the weight as my boot heels first
rang on the deck plating beneath the shuttle . i didnt object experience had taught me
that it was a good idea for people meeting him for the first time to get the full picture
in increments . 
i paused fractionally for dramatic effect before striding forward to meet the small knot
of guard officers drawn up to greet me by the main cargo doors the clang of my
footsteps on the metal sounding as crisp and authoritative as i could contrive an effect
undercut slightly by the pops and clangs from the scorched area under the shuttle
engines as it cooled and jurgens tottering gait behind me . 
welcome commissar . this is a great honour . a surprisingly young woman with red
hair and blue eyes stepped forward and snapped a crisp salute with parade ground
efficiency . i thought for a moment that i was being subtly snubbed with only the
junior officers present before i reconciled her face with the file picture in the briefing
slate . i returned the salute . 
colonel kasteen . i nodded an acknowledgement . despite having no objection to
being fawned over by young women in the normal course of events i found such a
transparent attempt at ingratiation a little nauseating . then i got a good look at her
hopeful expression and felt as though id stepped on a nonexistent final stair . she was
absolutely sincere . emperor help me they really were pleased to see me . things must
be even worse here than id imagined . 
just how bad they actually were i had yet to discover but i already had some
presentiment . for one thing the palms of my hands were tingling which always
means theres trouble hanging in the air like the static before a storm and for another
id broken with the habit of a lifetime and actually read the briefing slate carefully on
the tedious voyage out here to meet the ship . 
to cut a long story short morale in the valhallan 296th301st was at rock bottom and
the root cause of it all was obvious from the regiments title . combining belowstrength
regiments was standard practice among the imperial guard a sensible way of
consolidating after combat losses to keep units up to strength and of further use in the
field . what hadnt been sensible was combining what was left of the 301st a crack
planetary assault unit with fifteen hundred years of traditional belief in their innate
superiority over every other unit in the guard particularly the other valhallan ones
with the 296th a rear echelon garrison command which just to throw promethium on
the flames was one of the few all women regiments raised and maintained by that
desolate iceball . and just to put the cherry on it kasteen had been given overall
command by virtue of three days seniority over her new immediate subordinate a
man with far more combat experience . 
not that any of them truly lacked that now after the battle for corania . the tyranids
had attacked without warning and every guard regiment on the planet had been
forced to resist ferociously for nearly a year before the navy and a couple of astartes 
 had arrived to turn the tide . by that time every surviving unit had sustained
at least fifty per cent casualties many of them a great deal more and the bureaucrats
of the munitorium had begun the process of consolidating the battered survivors into
useful units once again . 
on paper at least . no one with any practical military experience would have been so
half witted as to ignore the morale effects of their decisions . but thats bureaucrats for
you . maybe if a few more administratum drones were given lasguns and told to
soldier alongside the troopers for a month or two it would shake their ideas up a bit . 
assuming by some miracle they werent shot in the back on the first day of course . 
but im digressing . i returned kasteens salute noting as i did so the faint
discolouration of the fabric beneath her rank insignia where her captains studs had
been before her recent unanticipated elevation to colonel . there had been few officers
left in either regiment by the time the nids had got through with them and theyd
been lucky at that . at least one of the newly consolidated units was being led by a
former corporal or so id heard . 2
 unfortunately neither of their commissars had
survived so thanks to my fortuitously timed transfer request id been handed the job
of sorting out the mess . lucky me . 
major broklaw my second in command . kasteen introduced the man next to her his
own insignia equally new . his face flushed almost imperceptibly but he stepped
forward to shake my hand with a firm grip . his eyes were flint grey beneath his dark
fringe of hair and he closed his hand a little too tightly trying to gauge my strength . 
two could play at that game of course and i had the advantage of a couple of
augmetic fingers so i returned the favour smiling blandly as the colour drained from
his face . 
major . i let him go before anything was damaged except his pride and turned to the
next officer in line . kasteen had rounded up pretty much her entire senior command
staff as protocol demanded but it was clear most of them werent too sure about
having me around . only a few met my eyes but the legend of cain the hero had
arrived here before me and the ones that did were obviously hoping id be able to turn
round a situation they all patently felt had gone way beyond their own ability to deal
with . 
i dont know what the rest were thinking they were probably just relieved i wasnt
talking about shooting the lot of them and bringing in somebody competent . of
course if that had been a realistic option i might have considered it but i had an

1 a common mistake . it is of course virtually unheard of for an entire astartes chapter to take the field at
once let alone two what cain obviously means here is that elements from two different chapters were
involved . (a couple of companies apiece from the reclaimers and the swords of the emperor . )
2 hed heard wrong or is possibly exaggerating for effect . the newly appointed colonel of the 112th rough
riders was a former sergeant true but had already received a battlefield promotion to lieutenant during the
defence of corania . none of the senior command staff in any of the recently consolidated units had made
the promotional jump directly from non commissioned officer . 

unwanted reputation for honesty and fairness to live up to so that was that . 
the introductions over i turned back to kasteen and indicated the tottering pile of
kitbags behind me . her eyes widened fractionally as she caught a glimpse of jurgens
face behind the barricade but i suppose anyone whod gone hand to hand with
tyranids would have found the experience relatively unperturbing and she masked it
quickly . most of the assembled officers i noted with well concealed amusement were
now breathing shallowly through their mouths . 
my aide gunner first class ferik jurgen . i said . in truth there was only one grade of
gunner but i didnt expect theyd know that and the small unofficial promotion would
add to whatever kudos he got from being the aide of a commissar . which in turn
would reflect well on me . perhaps you could assign him some quarters . 
of course . she turned to one of the youngest lieutenants a blonde girl of vaguely
equine appearance who looked as if shed be more at home on a farm somewhere than
in uniform and nodded . sulla . get the quartermaster to sort it out . 
ill do it myself she replied slightly overdoing the eager young officer routine . 
magils doing his best but hes not quite on top of the system yet . kasteen nodded
blandly unaware of any problem but i could see broklaws jaw tighten and noticed
that most of the men present failed to mask their displeasure . 
sulla was our quartermaster sergeant until the last round of promotions kasteen
explained . she knows the ships resources better than anyone . 
im sure she does i said diplomatically . and im sure she has far more pressing
duties to perform than finding a bunk for jurgen . well liaise with your sergeant magil
ourselves if you have no objection . 
none at all . kasteen looked slightly puzzled for a moment then dismissed it . 
broklaw i noticed from the corner of my eye was looking at me with something
approaching respect now . well that was something at least . but it was pretty clear i
was going to have my work cut out to turn this divided and demoralised rabble into
anything resembling a fighting unit . 
well up to a point anyway . if they were a long way from being ready to fight the
enemies of the emperor they were certainly in good enough shape to fight among
themselves as i was shortly to discover . 
i havent reached my second century by ignoring the little presentiments of trouble
which sometimes appear out of nowhere like those itching palms of mine or the little
voice in the back of my head which tells me something seems too good to be true . but
in my first few days aboard the righteous wrath i had no need of such subtle
promptings from my subconscious . tension hung in the air of the corridors assigned
to us like ozone around a daemonhost all but striking sparks from the bulkheads . and
i wasnt the only one to feel it . none of the other regiments on board would venture
into our part of the ship either for social interaction or the time honoured tradition of
perpetrating practical jokes against the members of another unit . the naval provosts
patrolled in tense wary groups . desperate for some kind of respite i even made
courtesy calls on the other commissars aboard but these were far from convivial 

humourless emperor botherers to a man the younger ones were too overwhelmed by
respect for my reputation to be good company and most of the older ones were
quietly resentful of what they saw as a glory hogging young upstart . tedious as these
interludes were though i was to be grateful for them sooner than i thought . 
the one bright spot was captain parjita whod commanded the vessel for the past
thirty years and with whom i hit it off from our first dinner together . im sure he only
invited me the first time because protocol demanded it and perhaps out of curiosity to
see what a hero of the imperium actually looked like in the flesh but by the time we
were halfway through the first course we were chatting away like old friends . i told a
few outrageous lies about my past adventures and he reciprocated with some
anecdotes of his own and by the time wed got onto the amasec i felt more relaxed
than i had in months . for one thing he really appreciated the problems i was facing
with kasteen and her rabble . 
you need to reassert some discipline he told me unnecessarily . before the rot
spreads any further . shoot a few thatll buck their ideas up . 
easy to say of course but not so easy in practice . thats what most commissars would
have done admittedly but getting a regiment united because theyre terrified of you
and hate your guts has its own drawbacks particularly as youre going to find yourself
in the middle of a battlefield with these people before very long and theyll all have
guns . and as ive already said i had a reputation to maintain and a good part of that
was keeping up the pretence that i actually gave a damn about the troopers under my
command . so not an option unfortunately . 
it was while i was on my way back to my quarters from one such pleasant evening
that my hand was forced and in a way i could well have done without . 
it was the noise that alerted me at first a gradually swelling babble of voices from
the corridors leading to our section of the ship . my pleasantly reflective mood
enhanced by parjitas amasec and a comfortable win over the regicide board
evaporated in an instant . i knew that sound all too well and the clatter of boots on the
deck behind me as a squad of provosts double timed towards the disturbance with
shock batons drawn was enough to confirm it . i picked up my pace to join them
falling in beside the section leader . 
sounds like a riot . i said . the blank visored head nodded . 
quite right sir . 
any idea what sparked it . not that it mattered . the simmering resentment among the
valhallans was almost cause enough on its own . any excuse would have done . if he
did have a clue i never got to hear it as we arrived at the door of the mess hall a
ceramic cup bearing the regimental crest of the 296th shattered against his helmet . 
emperors blood . i ducked reflexively taking cover behind the nearest piece of
furniture to assess the situation while the provosts waded in ahead of me striking out
with their shock batons at any target that presented itself . the room was a heaving
mass of angry men and women punching kicking and flailing at one another all 

semblance of discipline shot to hell . several were down already bleeding screaming
being trampled on by the still active combatants and the casualties were rising all the
time . 
the fiercest fighting was going on in the centre of the room a small knot of brawlers
clearly intent on actual murder unless someone intervened . fine by me thats what the
provosts were for . i hunkered down behind an overturned table scanning the room as
i voxed a situation report to kasteen and watched them battle their way forward . the
two fighters at the centre of the melee seemed evenly matched to me a shaven headed
man muscled like a catachan who towered over a wiry young woman with shortcropped
raven black hair . whatever advantage he had in strength she could match in
agility striking hard and leaping back out of range reducing most of his strikes to
glancing blows which is just as well as a clean hit from those ham like fists would
likely have stove her ribcage in . as i watched he spun launching a lethal roundhouse
kick to her temple she ducked just a fraction slow and went sprawling as his foot
grazed the top of her head but twisted upright again with a knife from one of the
tables in her hand . the blow came up towards his sternum but he blocked it opening
up a livid red gash along his right arm . 
it was about then that things really started to go wrong . the provosts had made it
almost halfway to the brawl i was watching when the two sides finally realised they
had an enemy in common . a young woman blood pouring from a broken nose was
unceremoniously yanked away from the man whose groin shed been aiming a kick at
and rounded on the provost attempting to restrain her . her elbow strike bounced
harmlessly off his torso armour but her erstwhile opponent leapt to her defence
swinging a broken plate in a short clinical arc which impacted precisely on the neck
joint where helmet met flak a bright crimson spurt of arterial blood sprayed the
surrounding bystanders as the stricken provost dropped to his knees trying to stem the
bleeding . 
emperors bowels . i began to edge my way back towards the door to wait for the
reinforcements kasteen had promised if they hadnt been before the mob was in a
killing mood now and anyone who looked like a symbol of authority would become
an obvious target . even as i watched both factions turned on the provosts in their
midst who disappeared under a swarm of bodies . the troopers barely seemed human
any more . id seen tyranids move like that in response to a perceived threat but this
was even worse . your average nid swarm has purpose and intelligence behind
everything it does even though its hard to remember that when a tidal wave of chitin
is bearing down on you with every intention of reducing you to mincemeat but it was
clear that there was no intelligence working here just sheer brute blood lust . emperor
damn it ive seen khornate cults with more self restraint than those supposedly
disciplined guard troopers displayed in that mess hall . 
at least while they were ripping the provosts apart they werent likely to notice me so
i made what progress i could towards the door ready to take command of the
reinforcements as soon as they arrived . and i would have made it too if the squad 

leader hadnt surfaced long enough to scream commissar . help . 
oh great . every pair of eyes in the room suddenly swung in my direction . i thought i
could see my reflection in every pupil tracking me like an auspex . 
if you take one more step towards that door i told myself youre a dead man . theyd
be on me in seconds . the only way to survive was to take them by surprise . so i
stepped forward instead as though id just entered the room . 
you . i pointed at a random trooper . get a broom . 
whatever theyd been expecting me to say or do this definitely wasnt it . the room
hung suspended in confused anticipation the silence stretching for an infinite second . 
no one moved . 
that was not a request i said raising my voice a little and taking another step
forward . this mess hall is an absolute disgrace . and no one is leaving until its been
tidied up . my boot skidded in a slowly congealing pool of blood . you you and you
go with him . buckets and mops . make sure you get enough to go round . confusion
and uncertainty began to spread troopers flicking nervous glances at one other as it
gradually began to dawn on them that the situation had got well out of hand and that
consequences had to be faced . the guardsmen id pointed out two of them women
began to edge nervously towards the door . 
at the double . i barked suddenly with my best parade ground snap the designated
troopers scurried out ingrained patterns of discipline reasserting themselves . 
and that was enough . the thunderstorm crackle of violence dissipated from the room
as though suddenly earthed . 
after that it was easy now that id asserted my authority the rest fell into line as meek
as you please and by the time kasteen arrived with another squad of provosts in tow
id already detailed a few more to escort the wounded and worse to the infirmary . a
surprising number were able to walk but there were still far too many stretcher cases
for my liking . 
you did well i hear . kasteen was at my elbow her face pale as she surveyed the
damage . i shrugged knowing from long experience that credit snowballs all the faster
the less you seem to want it . 
not well enough for some of these poor souls i said . 
bravest thing i ever saw i heard from behind me as one of the injured provosts was
helped away by a couple of his shipmates . he just stood there and faced them down
the whole damn lot . his voice faded adding another small increment to my heroic
reputation which i knew would be all round the ship by this time tomorrow . 
therell have to be an investigation . kasteen looked stunned still not quite capable of
taking in the full enormity of what had happened . we need to know who started it
what happenedö
whos to blame . broklaw cut in from the door . it was obvious from the direction of
his gaze where he thought the responsibility should lie . kasteen flushed . 
ive no doubt well discover the men responsible she said a faint but perceptible
stress on the pronoun . broklaw refused to rise to the bait . 

we can all thank the emperor we have an impartial adjudicator in the commissar
here he said smoothly . im sure we can rely on him to sort it out . 
thanks a lot i thought . but he was right . and how i handled it was to determine the
rest of my future with the regiment . not to mention leaving me running for my life yet
again beginning a long and unwelcome association with the emperors pet
psychopaths1
 and an encounter with the most fascinating woman ive ever met . 

1 description of his divine majestys not the most flattering or accurate most holy inquisition it must be
admitted . 

two
you get more with a kind word and an excruciator than with just a kind word . 
  inquisitor maiden . 
so what youre trying to tell me i said turning the piece of crockery over in my
hand is that three people are dead fourteen still in the infirmary and a perfectly
serviceable mess hall reduced to kindling because your men didnt like the plates they
were served their meal on . broklaw squirmed visibly on one of the chairs id had
jurgen bring into my office for the conference   id told him to fetch the most
uncomfortable ones he could find as every little bit helps when youre trying to exert
your authority   but the majors discomfiture wasnt due to just that alone . kasteen was
still visibly suppressing a smirk which i was planning to wipe away in a moment . 
well that may be overstating it a littleö he began . 
thats precisely what happened kasteen cut in acidly . i hefted the plate . it was good
quality porcelain delicate but strong and one of the few pieces remaining intact after
the mess hall riot . the regimental crest of the 296th was prominent in the centre of it . i
turned to the dataslate on my desk and made a show of paging through the reports and
witness statements id spent the past week collecting . 
according to this witness statement the first punch was swung by a corporal bella
trebek . a member of the 296th prior to the amalgamation . i raised an inquisitive
eyebrow in kasteens direction . would the colonel care to comment . 
she was clearly provoked kasteen said losing the smirk which seemed to hover in
the air for a moment before jumping across to broklaw . 
just so i nodded judiciously . by a sergeant tobias kelp . who it says here threw his
plate down declaring that he would be damned if he ate off some . i made a show of
getting the quotation scrupulously correct . mincing tarts front parlour tea service . 
does that strike you as a reasonable comment major . 
the smirk disappeared again . 
not particularly no he said clearly wondering where this line of questioning was
going . but we still dont know the full circumstances . 
i think the circumstances are perfectly clear i said . the former troopers of the 296th
and the 301st have cordially detested one another since the regiments were
amalgamated . under the circumstances the use of the 296ths regimental dinner
service was bound to be regarded as an insult by the stupider elements of the former
301st . broklaw flushed at that . good let him get angry . the only way to salvage the
situation was to make radical changes and that wouldnt work unless i could get the
senior officers to feel passionately that they were necessary . 
which begs another question i went on smoothly . just who was stupid enough to
order the use of the dinner service in the first place . i aimed my second best
intimidating commissarial glare at kasteen for a fraction of a second before snapping 

it round to nail the junior officer sitting at her right . lieutenant sulla . that would be
you would it not . 
it was founding day . she retorted . that did take me by surprise . i didnt often get
people bouncing back from a number two glare but i concealed it with the ease of long
practice . we always use the regimental ceramics on founding day . its one of our
proudest traditions . 
it was broklaw broke in with sardonic amusement . but unless youve got some
traditional adhesive . 
both women bristled . for a moment i thought i was going to have to put down a brawl
in my own office . 
major i said reasserting my authority . im sure the 301st had their own founding
day traditions . that was a pretty safe bet as practically every regiment celebrated the
anniversary of its first founding in some way . he began to nod before my use of the
past tense registered with him and then an expression curiously close to apprehension
flickered across his face . i leaned back in my chair which unlike theirs id made sure
was comfortably padded and looked approving . its always good to keep people offbalance . 
im glad to hear it . such traditions are important . a vital part of the esprit de
corps we all rely on to win the emperor his victories . kasteen and broklaw nodded
cautiously almost together . good . that was one thing at least they could agree on . 
but sulla just flushed angrily . 
then perhaps you could explain that to kelp and his knuckle draggers she said . i
sighed tolerantly and placed my laspistol on the desk . the officers eyes widened
slightly . broklaws took on a wary expression kasteens one of barely suppressed
alarm and sullas jaw dropped open . 
please dont interrupt lieutenant . i said mildly . you can all have your say in a
moment . there was a definite edge in the room now . i had no intention of shooting
anyone of course but they werent going to like what i was about to say next and you
cant be too careful . i smiled to show i was harmless and they relaxed a fraction . 
nevertheless youve just illustrated my point perfectly . while the two halves of this
regiment still think of themselves as separate units morale is never going to recover . 
that means youre sod all use to the emperor and a pain in the arse to me . i paused
just long enough to let them assimilate what id just said . are we in agreement on that
at least . kasteen nodded meeting broklaws eyes for the first time since the meeting
began . 
i think so she said . the question is what do we do about it . 
good question . i passed a slate across the desk . she took it and broklaw leaned in to
scan it over her shoulder as she read . we can start by integrating the units at squad
level . as of this morning every squad will consist of roughly equal numbers of
troopers from each of the former regiments . 
thats ridiculous . broklaw snapped a fraction behind kasteens far from ladylike
exclamation . the men wont stand for it . 
neither will my women kasteen nodded in agreement with him . so far so good . 

making them feel they had common cause against me was the first step to getting
them to co operate properly . 
theyre going to have to i said . this ship is en route to a potential warzone . we
could be in combat within hours of our arrival and when that happens theyll have to
rely on the trooper next to them whoever it is . i dont want my people getting killed
because they dont trust their own comrades . so theyre going to train together and
work together until they start behaving like an imperial guard regiment instead of a
bunch of pre schola juvies . and then theyre going to fight the emperors enemies
together and i expect them to win . is that clear . 
perfectly commissar . kasteens jaw was tight . ill start reviewing the so&e1
 . 
perhaps it would be best if you did so with the majors help i suggested . between
you you should be able to select fire teams which at least have a reasonable chance of
turning their lasguns on the enemy instead of one another . 
of course . broklaw nodded . ill be pleased to help . the tone of his voice said
otherwise but at least the words were conciliatory . that was a start . but they really
werent going to like what was coming next . 
which brings me on to the new regimental designation . id been expecting some
outburst at this but the trio of officers in front of me just stared in stupefied silence . i
guess they were trying to convince themselves they hadnt heard what id just said . 
the current one just emphasises the divisions between what used to be the 301st and
the 296th . we need a new one ladies and gentleman a single identity under which we
can march into battle united and resolute as true servants of the emperor . all good
stirring stuff and for a moment i actually thought they were going to buy it without
any further argument . but of course it was that daft mare sulla who burst the bubble . 
you cant just abolish the 296th . she almost shouted . our battle honours go back
centuries . 
if you count slapping down stroppy colonists as battles . broklaw rose to the bait . the
301st has fought orks eldar tyranidsó
oh . were there tyranids on corania . i guess i was just too busy with my needlepoint
to notice . sullas voice rose another octave . 
shut up . both of you . kasteens voice was quiet but firm and stunned both her
subordinates into silence . i nodded gratefully at her forestalled from having to do the
job myself and pleasantly surprised . it was beginning to look as though she had the
makings of an effective commander after all . lets hear what the commissar has to say
before we start inventing objections to it . 
thank you colonel i said before resuming . what i propose is to treat the date of
amalgamation as a new first founding . ive had the ships astropath contact the
munitorium and theyve agreed in principle . there is currently no regiment designated

1 slate of organisation and equipment . not actually a physical dataslate but an archaic term for the details
of the disposition of troopers and equipment within an imperial guard unit . still in use among many
regiments with more than a thousand years of unbroken tradition . 

the valhallan 597th so ive proposed adopting that as our new identity . 
two hundred and ninety six plus three hundred and one . i see kasteen nodded . 
very clever broklaw nodded too . 
a very neat way of preserving the identities of the old regiments he said . but
combined into something new . 
as was always the intention i agreed . 
but thats outrageous . sulla said . you cant just redesignate an entire regiment out of
existence . 
the commissariat gives its servants wide discretionary powers i said mildly . how
we interpret them is a matter of judgment and sometimes temperament . not every
commissar would have resisted the temptation to discourage further dissension in the
ranks by decimation for instance . quite true of course . there were damn few whod
go quite so far as to randomly execute one in ten of the troopers under their command
to encourage the others but they did exist and if ever a regiment was so undisciplined
that such a drastic measure might have been justified it was this one and they knew
it . they were just lucky theyd got cain the hero instead of some gung ho psychopath . 
ive met one or two in my time and the best thing you can say for them is that they
dont tend to be around long particularly once the shooting starts . i smiled to show i
didnt mean it . 
if the new designation is unacceptable i added the 48th penal legion is also
available im told sulla blenched . kasteen smiled tightly unsure of how serious i
was . 
the 597th sounds good to me she said . major broklaw . 
an excellent compromise . he nodded slowly letting the idea percolate . therell be
some grumbling in the ranks . but if ever a regiment needed a new beginning its this
one . 
amen to that kasteen agreed . the two senior officers looked at one another with
renewed respect . that was a good sign too . 
only sulla still looked unhappy . broklaw noticed and caught her eye . 
cheer up lieutenant he said . that would make our next founding day . he paused
fractionally glancing at me for confirmation as he worked it out . 
i nodded . youll have nearly eight months to come up with some brand new
traditions . 
of course the changes id imposed didnt go down too well with the rank and file at
least to begin with and i got most of the blame . but then ive never expected to be
popular ever since i got selected for commissarial training ive known i could expect
very little from the troopers around me apart from resentment and suspicion . as my
undeserved reputation has snowballed of course thats got to be the case less and less
of the time but back then i was still taking it more or less for granted . 
gradually though the reorganisation id insisted on began to work and the training
exercises we put the troopers through were beginning to make them think like soldiers 

again . i instituted a weekly prize of an afternoons downtime for the most efficient
platoon in the regiment and a doubling of the ale rations for the members of the most
disciplined squad within it and that helped remarkably . i felt wed really turned a
corner the morning i overheard one of the new mixed squads chatting together in the
freshly repainted mess hall instead of splitting into two separate groups as theyd
tended to do in the beginning and exulting over their higher place in the rankings than
a rival platoon . these days im told cains round is a cherished tradition in the
597th and the competition for the extra ration of ale still hotly contested . all in all i
suppose there are worse things to be remembered for . 
the one problem we still had to resolve of course was the matter of those responsible
for the riots in the first place . kelp and trebek were for it there was no doubt about
that along with a handful of others who had been positively identified as responsible
for the worst of the deaths and injuries . but for the time being id put off the question
of punishment . the wholesale reforms id instigated and the subsequent improvement
in morale were still fragile and i didnt dare risk it by ordering executions . 
so i did what any sensible man in my position would have done dragged my feet
under the pretext of carrying out a thorough investigation kept the defaulters locked
away where with any luck most of their comrades would forget about them in the
general upheaval and hoped something would turn up . it was a good plan and it
would have worked too at least until we arrived in a warzone somewhere and i could
quietly return them to a unit or have them transferred away with no one any the wiser
if it hadnt been for my good friend captain parjita . 
technically of course he was well within his rights to demand copies of all the
reports id been compiling and i hadnt thought there was any harm in letting him
have them . what id been forgetting was that the righteous wrath wasnt just a
collection of corridors bunkrooms and training bays it was his ship and that he was
the ultimate authority aboard . two of the dead had been his provosts after all and he
wasnt about to sit back and let the perpetrators get away with it . he wanted a full
court martial of the guilty troopers while we were still on board and he could make
sure they were punished to his satisfaction . 
i know you want to be thorough he said one evening as we set up the regicide board
in his quarters . but frankly ciaphas i think youre overdoing it . you already know
who the guilty parties are . just shoot them and have done with it . 
i shook my head regretfully . but what would that solve . i asked . would it bring your
men back to life . 
thats not the point . he held out both fists concealing playing pieces . i picked the
left and found i was playing blue . a minor tactical disadvantage but one i was sure i
could overcome . regicide isnt really my game to be honest   give me a tarot deck
and a table full of suckers with more money than sense any day   but it passed the time
pleasantly enough . there really cant be any other verdict . and every day you delay
just leaves the cowardly scum cluttering up my brig eating my food breathing my
airö he was getting quite emotional . i began to suspect that there had been more 

than a simple line of command relationship between him and one of the dead
provosts1
 . 
believe me i said . theres nothing id like better than to draw a line under this whole
sorry affair . but the situations complicated . if i have them shot the whole regiment
could unravel again . morales just starting to recover . 
i appreciate that . parjita nodded . but thats not my problem . ive got a crew to think
about and they want to see their comrades avenged . he made his opening move . 
i see . i moved one of my own pieces playing for time in more senses than one . then
its clearly long past time that justice was served . 
are you insane . kasteen asked looking at me across the desk and trying to ignore
the hovering presence of jurgen who was shuffling some routine reports i couldnt be
bothered to deal with . if you condemn the defaulters now well be right back where
we started . trebeks very popular with theö she shot a quick glance at broklaw
seated next to her and overrode the remark shed been about to make . with some of
the troopers . 
the same goes for kelp . broklaw moved quickly to back her up . exactly the reaction
id been hoping for now the regiment was beginning to function properly kasteen
and broklaw had begun to slip into their roles of commander and executive officer as
smoothly as if the bad feeling between them had never existed . well up to a point
anyway there was still an air of strained politeness between them occasionally which
betrayed the effort but they were well on the way . and to be honest it was far more
than i could have hoped for when i stepped off the shuttle . 
i agree i said . thank you jurgen . my aide had appeared at my shoulder with a pot
of tanna leaf tea as was his habit whenever i was in my office at this time of the
morning . could you get another couple of bowls . 
of course commissar . he shuffled away as i poured my own drink and pushed the
tray to the side of my desk . the warm aromatic steam relaxed me as it always did . 
not for me thank you broklaw said hastily as jurgen returned a fresh pair of
teabowls pinched together by a grubby finger and thumb on the inside of the rims . 
kasteen blenched slightly but accepted a drink anyway . she kept it on the desk in
front of her picking it up from time to time to punctuate her side of the conversation
but never quite getting round to taking the first sip . i was quietly impressed . shed
have made a good diplomat if she hadnt been so honest . 
the problem is i went on that captain parjita is the ultimate authority aboard this
ship and hes well within his rights to insist on a court martial . if we dont let him
have one hell just invoke his command privilege and have kelp and the others shot
anyway . and we simply cant let that happen . 
so what do you suggest . kasteen asked replacing the teabowl after another almost 

1 cain is correct in this assumption . strictly against regulations of course but boys will be boysö 

sip . regimental discipline is supposed to be your responsibility after all . 
precisely i took a sip of my own tea savouring the bitter aftertaste and nodded
judiciously . and ive been able to convince him that i cant have that authority
undermined if were to become a viable fighting unit . 
youve got him to agree to some kind of compromise . broklaw asked grasping the
point at once . 
i have i tried not to sound too smug . he can have his court martial and run it
himself under naval regulations . but once theyre found guilty theyll be turned over
to the commissariat for sentencing . 
but that takes us right back to where we were before kasteen said clearly puzzled . 
you have them shot and discipline goes to the warp . again . 
maybe not i said taking another sip of tea . not if were careful . 
ive seen more than my fair share of tribunals over the years even been in front of
them on occasion and if theres one thing ive learned its this its easy to get the result
you want out of them . the trick is simply to state your case as clearly and concisely as
possible . that and making damn sure the members of it are on your side to begin
with . 
there are a number of ways of ensuring that this is the case . bribery and threats are
always popular but generally to be avoided especially if youre likely to attract
inquisitorial attention as theyre better at both and tend to resent other people resorting
to their methods . 1
 besides that sort of thing tends to leave a residue of bad feeling
which can come back to haunt you later on . in my experience its far more effective to
make sure that the other members of the panel are honest unimaginative idiots with a
strong sense of duty and a stronger set of prejudices you can rely on to deliver the
result that you want . if they think youre a hero and hang on your every word so
much the better . 
so when parjita announced his verdict of guilty on all charges and turned to me with
a self satisfied smirk i had my strategy worked out well in advance . the courtroom  
a hastily converted wardroom generally used by the ships most junior officers   went
silent . 
there were five troopers in the dock by the time the trial had begun far fewer than
parjita had wanted but in the interests of fairness and damage limitation i had
managed to persuade him to let me deal summarily with most of the outstanding cases . 
those guilty of more minor offences had been demoted flogged or assigned to latrine
duty for the foreseeable future and safely returned to their units where in the
unfathomable processes of the troopers mindset i had somehow become the
embodiment of justice and mercy . this had been helped along by a little judicious
myth making among the senior officers who had let it be known that parjita was
hellbent on mass executions and that i had spent the past few weeks exerting every

1 this is of course entirely untrue . as his divine majestys most faithful servants were most definitely
above such petty emotions as resentment . 

iota of my commissarial authority in urging clemency for the vast majority finally
succeeding against almost impossible odds . the net result aided no end by my
fictitious reputation was that a couple of dozen potential troublemakers had been
quietly integrated back into the roster practically grateful for the punishments theyd
received and morale had remained steady among the rank and file . 
the problem now facing me was that of the hardcore recidivists who were
undoubtedly guilty of murder or its attempt . there were five of them facing the
courtroom now wary and resentful . 
three of them i recognised at once from the melee in the mess hall . kelp was the
huge over muscled man id seen being stabbed and trebek to my complete lack of
surprise was the petite woman who had almost disembowelled him . they stood at
opposite ends of the row of prisoners glaring at one another almost as much as at
parjita and myself and if it hadnt been for their manacles i had no doubt theyd be at
one anothers throats again in a heartbeat . in the centre was the young trooper id seen
stab the provost with a broken plate his datafile told me his name was tomas
holenbi and id had to look twice to make sure it was the same man . he was short and
skinny with untidy red hair and a face full of freckles and hed spent most of the trial
looking bewildered and on the verge of tears . if i hadnt seen his fit of homicidal rage
for myself i would hardly have believed him capable of such insensate violence . the
real irony was that he was a medical orderly not a front line soldier at all . 
between him and trebek was another female trooper one griselda velade . she was
stocky brunette and clearly out of her depth as well . the only one of the group to
have killed a fellow trooper she had claimed throughout that shed only intended to
fend him off it was an unlucky blow that had crushed the fellows larynx and left him
to suffocate on the mess room floor . parjita needless to say hadnt bought it or cared
whether she intended murder or not he just wanted as many valhallans in front of a
firing squad as he could manage . 
on holenbis other side was maxim sorel a tall rangy man with short blond hair and
the cold eyes of a killer . sorel was a sharpshooter a long las specialist who snuffed
out lives from a distance as dispassionately as i might swat an insect . of all of them
he was the one who most threw a scare into me . the others had been carried away by
the blood lust of a mob and hadnt really been responsible for their actions past a
certain point but sorel had slid a knife through the joints of a provosts body armour
simply because he hadnt seen any reason not to . the last time id looked into eyes like
those theyd belonged to an eldar haemonculus . 
if it was up to me . parjita said continuing i would have the lot of you shot at once . 
i glanced down the line of prisoners again and noted their reactions . kelp and trebek
glared defiantly back at him daring him to make good on the threat . holenbi blinked
and swallowed rapidly . velade gasped audibly biting her lower lip and began to
hyperventilate . to my surprise i saw holenbi reach across and give her hand a
reassuring squeeze . then again theyd been in adjoining cells for weeks now so i
suppose theyd had time to get to know each other . sorel simply blinked a complete 

lack of emotional response that sent shivers down my spine . 
nevertheless the captain went on commissar cain has been able to persuade me
that the commissariat is better suited to maintaining discipline among the imperial
guard and has requested that they be permitted to pass sentence according to military
rather than naval regulations . he nodded cordially to me . commissar . theyre all
yours . 
five pairs of eyes swivelled in my direction . i stood slowly glancing down at the
dataslate on the table in front of me . 
thank you captain . i turned to the trio of black uniformed figures sitting at my side . 
and thank you commissars . your advice in this case has been invaluable to me . 
three solemn heads nodded in my direction . 
this was the trick you see . my earlier contact with the other commissars on board had
unexpectedly paid off showing me who would be the most easily swayed by my
arguments . a couple of eager young pups just past cadet and a jaded old campaigner
who had lived most of his life on the battlefield . and all of them flattered from here to
terra to be taken into the confidence of the celebrated ciaphas cain . i turned back to
the prisoners . 
a commissars duty is often harsh . i said . regulations are there to be obeyed and
discipline to be enforced . and those regulations do indeed prescribe the ultimate
penalty for murder unless there are extenuating circumstances   circumstances i have
to admit i have striven to find in this case to the best of my abilities . i had them all on
the hook by now . the fans in the ceiling ducts sounded almost as loud as a chimera
engine . and to my great disappointment i have been unsuccessful . 
there was an audible intake of breath from practically every pair of lungs present . 
parjita grinned triumphantly sure hed got the blood vengeance he lusted after . 
however i went on after a fractional pause . a faint frown appeared on the captains
face and a flicker of hope on velades . as my esteemed colleagues will undoubtedly
agree one of the heaviest burdens a commissar must carry is the responsibility to
ensure that the regulations are obeyed not only in the letter but the spirit . and it was
with that in mind that i took the liberty of consulting with them about a possible
interpretation of those regulations which i felt might offer a solution to my dilemma i
turned dramatically to the little group of commissars taking the opportunity to
underline that it wasnt just me cheating parjita out of his firing squad it was the
commissariat itself . again gentlemen i thank you . not only on my behalf but on
behalf of the regiment i have the honour to serve with . 
i turned to kasteen and broklaw who were observing proceedings from the side of
the courtroom and inclined my head to them too . i was laying it on with a trowel i
dont mind admitting it but ive always enjoyed being the centre of attention when that
doesnt involve incoming fire . 
a commissars primary concern must always be the efficiency of the unit to which he
is attached . i said and by extension the battlefield effectiveness of the entire
imperial guard . its a heavy responsibility but one we are proud to bear in the 

emperors name . the other commissars nodded in sycophantic self congratulation . 
and that means that im always loath to sacrifice the life of a trained soldier whatever
the circumstances unless its the only way to win his glorious majesty the victories
he requires . 
i assume that youre eventually going to come to a point of some kind . parjita
interrupted . i nodded as though hed done me a favour instead of disrupting the flow
of an oration id been practising in front of the mirror in my stateroom for most of the
morning . 
indeed i am i said . and the point is this . my colleagues and i   no harm in
reminding everyone again that this was a carefully contrived consensus not just me  
see no point in simply executing these troopers . their deaths will win us no victories . 
but the regulations . parjita began . this time it was my turn to cut him off in full flow . 
specify death as the punishment for these offences . it just doesnt specify immediate
death i turned to the line of confused and apprehensive prisoners . its the judgement
of the commissariat that you all be confined until it becomes expedient to transfer you
to a penal legion where an honourable death on the battlefield will almost certainly
befall you in the fullness of time . in the interim should a particularly hazardous
assignment become available you will have the honour of volunteering . in either case
you can expect the opportunity to redeem yourselves in the eyes of the emperor i
raked my eyes along the shabby little group again . kelp and trebek their truculence
mitigated by surprise holenbi still bewildered by the sudden turn of events velade
almost sobbing with relief and sorelö still that blank expression as though none of
this mattered at all . dismissed . 
i waited until theyd shuffled out assisted by the shock batons of the escorting
provosts and turned back to parjita . 
is that satisfy you captain . 
i suppose itll have to he said sourly . 
congratulations commissar . kasteen raised a glass of amasec toasting my
victory and the mess hall erupted around me . i smiled modestly walking towards the
table occupied by the senior officers while men and women clapped and cheered and
chanted my name and generally carried on as though i was the emperor himself
dropping in for a visit . i half expected some of them to try patting me on the back but
respect for my position or an understandable reluctance to get too close to jurgen
who was dogging my heels as usual or both held them in check . i held up my hands
for silence as i reached my seat between kasteen and broklaw and the room
gradually fell quiet . 
thank you all i said injecting just the right level of barely perceptible quaver into
my voice to suggest powerful emotion held narrowly in check . you do me too much
honour for just doing my job . a chorus of denial and adulation followed as id known
it would . i waved them to silence again . well if you insistö i waited for the gale of
laughter to die down . while i have everyones attention and thats a refreshing novelty 

for a political officerö more laughter . i had them in the palm of my hand now . 
i waved them to silence again adopting a slightly more serious mien . i would just like
to offer some congratulations of my own . in the short time ive had the privilege of
serving with this regiment you have all far exceeded my most optimistic expectations . 
the past few weeks have been difficult for all of us but i can state with confidence
that i have never served with a body of troops more ready for combat and more
capable of seizing victory when that time comes . with confidence certainly . 
truthfully . that was another matter entirely . but it had the desired effect . i picked up
a glass from the table and toasted the room . to the 597th . a glorious beginning . 
the 597th . they all shouted men and women alike swept along with cheap emotion
and cheaper rhetoric . 
nicely done commissar broklaw murmured as i sat . the cheers were still deafening . 
i believe youve turned us into a proper regiment at last . 
id done something a lot more important than that of course . id established myself as a
popular figure among the common troopers which meant theyd watch my back if i
was ever careless enough to find myself anywhere near the actual combat zone . 
pulling them together into an effective fighting force was just a useful bonus . 
just doing my job i said as modestly as i could which is what they all expected of
course . and they lapped it up . 
and not before time kasteen added . i kept my features carefully composed but felt
my good mood begin to evaporate . 
weve had our orders . broklaw asked . the colonel nodded picking at her adeven
salad . some backwater dirtball called gravalax
never heard of it . i said . 
editorial note
given cains complete and typical lack of interest in anything that doesnt concern him
directly the following extract may prove useful in placing the rest of his narrative in a wider
context . it must be said that the book from which it comes isnt the most reliable of guides to the
campaign as a whole but it does unlike most studies of the gravalax incident at least attempt to
sketch in the historical background to the conflict . despite the authors obvious limitations as a
chronicler of events his summing up of the causus belli is su6stantially correct . 
from purge the guilty . an impartial account of the liberation of gravalax by stententious
logar . 
the seeds of the gravalax incident were sown many years before the full magnitude
of the crisis was realised and in retrospect it may well be easy to discern the slow
unfolding of an abhuman conspiracy over the span of several generations . a historian
however has the perspective of hindsight which alas cannot be said of the actual
participants . so rather than pointing an accusatory finger with righteous cries of
how could they have been so stupid . it behooves us more to shake our heads in pity
as we contemplate our forebears blind stumbling into the very brink of destruction . 
it goes without saying that no blame can be attached to the servants of the emperor
particularly those concerned with the ordering of his divine majestys fighting forces
and the diligent adepts of the administratum the ultima segmentum is vast and the
damocles gulf an obscure frontier sector . after the heathen tau were put in their place
by the heroic crusader fleet in the early seven forties attention rightly shifted to more
immediate threats the incursion of hive fleet leviathan the awakening of the
accursed necrons and the ever present danger from the traitor legions not least among
them . 
nevertheless the tau presence remained on the fringes of imperial space and all but
unnoticed they began once again to encroach on his divine majestys blessed
dominions . 
up until this point gravalax had been an obscure outpost of civilisation barely
noticed by the wider galaxy . enough of its landmasses were fertile to keep its
relatively sparse population tolerably well fed and it possessed adequate mineral
reserves for such industry as it supported . in short it had nothing to attract any trade
and an insufficient population base to be worth tithing for the imperial guard . it was
to be blunt a backwater devoid of anything of interest . 
if gravalax thought it was to remain undisturbed indefinitely however it was sadly
mistaken . within a century of their drubbing at the righteous hands of the servants of
the imperium the black hearted tau were back spreading their poisonous heresies
through the gulf once more . when they first chanced upon gravalax no one knows
but by the turn of the last century of the millennium they were well established there . 
it will come as no surprise to my readers aware as we must be of the innate treachery
of all aliens that they had arrived at this pass by an insidious process of infiltration . 
and shocking though it is to record it with the willing assistance of those whose
greed and thoughtlessness made them the perfect dupes of this monstrous conspiracy . 
i refer as you have no doubt already guessed to the so called rogue traders . rogues
indeed who would place their own interests above those of the imperium humanity
and the divine emperor himself . 
how and why these pariahs of profit first began trafficking with the tau history does
not record1
 . what is certain is that gravalax with its isolated position on the fringes of
imperial space and close to the expanding sphere of influence of these malign aliens
became the perfect meeting place for such clandestine exchanges . 
inevitably the corruption spread . as trade increased it became more open with tau
vessels becoming a common sight at the new and expanding starports . tau themselves
began to be seen on the streets of the gravalaxian cities mingling with the populace
tainting their human purity with their soulless alien ways . heresy began to run rife
even ordinary citizens daring to use blasphemous devices unblessed by the techpriests
supplied by their insidious offworld allies . 
something had to be done . and at last it was . the rising stench of corruption
eventually attracted the ceaseless vigilance of the inquisition which lost no time in
demanding the dispatch of a task force of the imperiums finest warriors to purge this
festering boil in the body of his holinesss blessed demesne . 
and thats precisely what they got . for in the van guard of this glorious endeavour
was none other than ciaphas cain the martial hero at whose very name the enemies
of humanity trembled in terrorö

1 or logar couldnt be bothered to do the research . 

three
old friends are like debt collectors they have a tendency to turn up when you least
expect them . 
  gilbran quail collected essays
as ive rattled around the galaxy ive seen a great many cities from the soaring
spires of holy terra itself to the blood choked gutters of some eldar reiver charnel
pit1
 but ive seldom seen anything stranger than the broad thoroughfares of mayoh
the planetary capital of gravalax . wed disembarked in good order the freshly sewn
banner of the 597th snapping proudly in the breeze that blew in gently across the
rockcrete hectares of the starport as the valhallans formed up by company and i
resisted the temptation to lean across and compliment sulla on her needlepoint . i
doubt that shed had anything to do with procuring it but it wasnt that which
dissuaded me . she just wasnt the kind to take a joke and was still harbouring a germ
of resentment at the organisational changes id instituted . we were a fine sight to
behold i have to admit the other regiments glancing at us sidelong as they marched
away although that may just have been surprise when they realised we were a mixed
unit . 2
all present and accounted for colonel . broklaw snapped a drill manual salute and
fell into place beside kasteen . she nodded inflated her chest and then hesitated on
the verge of giving the command . 
commissar she said . i think the honour should be yours . this regiment wouldnt
even exist if it wasnt for you . 
i dont mind admitting i was touched . although i have overall authority in whatever
unit im attached to commissars are always outside the regular chain of command
which means i dont really fit in anywhere . by letting me give the order to move out
she was demonstrating in the most practical form imaginable that i was as much a part
of the 597th as herself or broklaw or the humblest latrine orderly . the unaccustomed
sense of belonging choked me for a moment before the more rational part of my mind
started gloating about how much that would mean in facilitating my own survival . i

1 cain was part of the invasion force which cleansed sanguia . his account of this action is also 

recorded in
the archive . 
2 it was hardly unprecedented for men and women to serve together in the imperial guard .  notable units in which this was the norm included the omicron rangers tanith first and calderon rifles . however with
women making up fewer than ten per cent of the total number under arms and the vast majority of those
serving in single sex regiments it wouldnt be that surprising if the 597th excited a certain amount of
curiosity among the onlookers present . nodded making sure i looked suitably moved . 
thank you colonel i said simply . but i believe the honour belongs to us all . then i
filled my chest and bellowed move out . 
so we did . and if you think that sounds like a simple proposition you havent thought
it through . 
to put it into some kind of perspective a regiment consists of anything up to half a
dozen companies   five in our case most of which had four or five platoons . the
exception was third company which was our logistical support arm and consisted
mainly of transport vehicles engineering units and anything else we couldnt find a
sensible place for on the so&e . all told that came to much the same thing in a
headcount . factor in five squads a platoon at ten troopers each plus a command
element to keep them all in line and youre looking at nearly a thousand people by the
time youve added in the various specialists and the different layers of the overall
command structure . 
just to add to the confusion kasteen had decided to split the squads into five man
fire teams anticipating that any open conflict was likely to take place in and around
the urban areas . beating off the tyranids on corania had convinced her that smaller
formations were easier to coordinate in a city fight than full strength squads . 1
all this made for a fine martial display as we moved out you can be sure with
banners flying and the band thumping and parping away at if i should forget thee o
terra as though they had a grudge against the composer . there hadnt really been time
for rehearsals what with all the excitement aboard the righteous wrath but they were
making up in enthusiasm for whatever they lacked in proficiency and a high old time
was being had by all . it was a fine fresh day with a faint taste of salt in the breeze
from the nearby ocean at least until our chimeras and transport trucks started up and
began farting promethium fumes into the air . 
we intended to make an impression with our arrival and by the emperor we surely
did setting out to march the ten kloms2
 or so into the city . most of the troopers were
glad of the exercise revelling in the fresh air and sunshine after so long between
decks and swung along the highway lasguns at the slope . being an old hive boy
myself it was all one to me but i was affected by the general holiday atmosphere i
think and i dont mind admitting to a general diffuse glow of well being as we got
underway . 
kasteen and broklaw couldnt march of course having to look grander than the
common ground pounders and so trundled along at the front of the regiment in a
salamander and i seized the excuse to do the same . 1 a widespread though unofficial practice among units experienced in urban warfare . so much so that 
its now become part of the standard operating procedure in many regiments the ad hoc arrangement persisting
to become a permanent feature of their organisation . 
2 a valhallan slang abbreviation for kilometre cain served with valhallan units for most of his life and
almost inevitably his speech became peppered with colloquialisms acquired from them . 
cant have the regiments most vital officers plotting behind my back id said at the
briefing smiling to show i didnt mean it and pouring everyone a fresh cup of recaf to
show i was part of the team . so i lounged back in the open compartment at the rear of
a scout variant which jurgen kept half a tracks length behind theirs in the interest of
protocol and reinforcing the impression of my generally assumed modesty and took
the opportunity to feel rather pleased with myself . the synchronised slapping of two
thousand boot soles on the surface of the highway and the squarking of the band
almost drowned out the throb of our engine and we must have looked a splendid sight
as we left the main cargo gate of the starport behind us and began to approach the city . 
it was then that my palms began to itch again . there was nothing i could put my
finger on initially to explain my gradually intensifying sense of disquiet but
something was definitely tapping my subconscious on the shoulder and whispering
thats not rightö
as we entered the city itself my disquiet grew . i wasnt surprised to find the streets
free of traffic the local authorities having cleared the way for us a thousand troopers
and their ancillary equipment take up a lot of room and we were far from the first
regiment to have disembarked . indeed the occasional muffled curse from behind me
which cut through the din made it all too clear that the front few ranks would have
preferred it if the rough riders could have been held back for a while longer instead
of being sent through immediately ahead of us . come to that i dont suppose kasteen
was too thrilled about having to gaze at a streets width of horse arses for the duration
of our march either . but the broad thoroughfares were a little too quiet for my liking
and a little too open as well . im not agoraphobic by any means not like some hivers
who never feel comfortable under an open sky but there was something about those
wide streets that made me think of snipers and ambush . 
that made me scan the buildings as we passed and my unease grew the more i saw of
them . there was nothing wrong with them as such not like the bizarre architectural
forms of a chaos incursion which seem to twist reality and which hurt to look upon or
the brutal slapdash functionalism of orkish habitations but there was something in
their sweeping forms which seemed vaguely inhuman . i was put in mind of some eldar
architecture by their elegant simplicity and then it finally hit me there were no right
angles anywhere even the corners having been rounded and smoothed . but beneath
this strange styling the shapes were clearly those of warehouses apartment blocks
and manufactoria as though the whole city had been left out in the sun for too long
and had started to melt . 
that alone should have been enough warning of an insidious alien influence at work
here but before we reached our destination i was to see far more than that . 
theres something seriously wrong here i said to jurgen who looked up briefly from
the road ahead to nod in agreement with me . 
something doesnt smell right he agreed without a trace of irony . have you seen the
civilians . 
now that he came to mention it there were remarkably few of them lining the route . 

normally a big military parade would have brought them out in droves waving their
aquila flags and their icons of the divine one cheering themselves hoarse to see so
many of the emperors finest ready to see off the foe so they could scuttle back to their
meaningless lives without the fear of having to fight for themselves . but the
pavements were half empty and for every shopkeeper or habwife or juvie who
cheered and waved or smiled wanly at us with sidelong glances at their neighbours
there were just as many who scowled or glared at us . that put a shiver down my spine
awakening uncomfortable and all too recent memories of the mess hall riot and the
blood maddened troopers a hair from turning on me . 
at least no one was shouting or throwing things . yet . but i reached down
unobtrusively and loosened my laspistol and my trusty chainsword ready to be drawn
in a hurry if i needed them . 
and right on cue i noticed the first of the banners . murderers go home . it said
in shaky capitals hand lettered on what looked like an old bedsheet . someone had
strung it from a luminator pole so that it hung out across the street comfortably above
head height but low enough to brush irritatingly over the head and shoulders of
anyone riding in a vehicle . 
or on a horse for that matter . as i watched one of the rough rider officers reached
up irritably and tore it down . 
bad move i said to myself expecting some trouble from the crowd but beyond a
little catcalling from a small knot of juvies nothing happened . but i was getting a
distinctly uncomfortable feeling about all this . there was a perceptible undercurrent of
tension in the air now like a fainter echo of the incipient violence id felt aboard the
righteous wrath . 
go back to your emperor and leave us alone . a pretty girl shouted her head shaven
apart from a single shoulder length braid and i felt as though id been doused with
cold water . your emperor . the words had been unmistakable . 
heretics . jurgen said with loathing . i nodded still unable to credit it . could the great
enemy have a foothold here as well as the tau . but common sense argued against it . 
if that were the case wed have bombarded the place from orbit surely and the
astartes would have been sent in to cut out the cancer before it could spread . things
werent as far gone as id feared however as i turned back to look a squad of arbites
forced their way through the crowd and began laying into the juvies with shock
batons . good order was still being maintained here by the emperors grace but for
how much longer . 
that i very much feared depended on us . 
we reached our staging area without further incident fanning out through a
complex of warehouses and manufactoria which had been set aside for our use . we
werent the only regiment quartered there i recall as the imperium had been fortifying
against an expected incursion by the tau for some time and i gathered that the
righteous wraths complement (three full regiments apart from our own) brought the 

total up to around thirty thousand all told . that should have been more than enough to
keep a backwater planet even spread out across the whole globe but rumour had it we
could expect still more reinforcement which worried me more than i wanted to show . 
with that amount of build up it seemed the aliens wanted this place quite badly and
wed more than likely be expected to hold it the hard way . 
we were quartered next to one of the valhallan armoured regiments   the 14th i think
  but i couldnt tell you who most of the others were . there was definite evidence that
the rough riders were still somewhere in the vicinity though so you had to watch
your feet but apart from that i hadnt a clue . except for one other unit i already knew
well of course which ill come to in a moment . 
i was still feeling spooked from our journey through town so i was relieved to come
across broklaw posting sentries around our corner of the compound as i left jurgen to
sort out my quarters and went for a wander around to get my bearings . i havent
reached my second century by not knowing where the best boltholes and lines of
retreat are and finding them was always a high priority for me whenever i found
myself somewhere new . 
good thinking major . i complimented him and he gave me a wry grin . 
we should be safe enough here he said . but it never hurts to be careful . 
i know what you mean i agreed . theres something about this place which really
gets under my skin . the warehouses around us all had that peculiar rounded off look
id noticed before and the subtle sense of wrongness left a vague apprehension
hovering around me like jurgens body odour . the major knew his business though
setting up lascannon in sandbagged emplacements to cover the gaps between the
buildings around us and sharpshooters on the roof . i was just admiring his
thoroughness when the ground began to shake and a couple of our sentinels appeared
clanking and humming and swivelling their heavy multilasers as they took up position
in front of the main loading doors which gave access to the ground floor where our
vehicles were parked . 
somewhat reassured by this i made my way across the compound passing into areas
controlled by other units watching the familiar bustle of troopers coming and going
and finding the familiar air of controlled chaos and the constant background hum of
vehicle engines and profanity curiously soothing . i wasnt sure quite how far id gone
when an engine note both louder and deeper than the others cut through the babble of
sound around me . 
for a moment i was assailed by that formless sense of recognition that you get when
something you once knew so well it never registered consciously comes back to your
notice after a passage of years and then i turned my head with a nostalgic smile . a
trojan heavy hauler with an earthshaker howitzer in tow was growling its way
across a vast open area which had probably once been used to park the private
vehicles of the workers who toiled here in happier times but which was now choked
with equipment and supplies . i hadnt seen one of those up close in a long time but i
recognised it at once having started my long and inglorious career in an obscure 

artillery unit . the flood of memories the sight brought back a few of them even
pleasant was so overwhelming that for a moment i was unaware of the voice calling
my name . 
cai . over here . 
now ive never been what youd call oversupplied with friends it goes with the job i
suppose but of the few ive acquired over the years only one has ever had the
presumption to use the familiar form of my given name . so despite the changes that
the years since id seen him last had wrought there was no mistaking the officer who
was running across the compound towards me grinning like an idiot . 
toren . i called back as he sidestepped another trojan just in time to avoid being
squashed into the tarmac like a bug . when did they make you a major . the last time
id seen toren divas hed just made captain and was nursing a hangover as he saw me
off from the 12th field artillery . i remember thinking at the time he was probably the
only man in the battery who was sorry to see me go . and what in the name of the
emperors arse are you doing here . 
the same as you i suppose . he came panting up to me the familiar lopsided grin on
his face . keeping order purging the heretics same old thing . there were streaks of
grey at his temples now i noticed and his belt was out another notch but the same air
of boyish enthusiasm still hung around him as on the day wed first met . but im
surprised to find you in a backwater like this . 
same here i said . i turned my head taking in the bustle surrounding us . this seems
like an awful lot of firepower to put the frighteners on a bunch of stroppy provincials . 
if the tau mobilise well need every bit of it divas said . some of their wargear has
to be seen to be believed . theyve got these things like dreadnoughts but theyre fast
like astartes infantry but twice the size and their tanks make the eldar stuff look like
they were built by orks . 
as usual he seemed to be relishing the prospect of combat which is easy to do when
youre kilometres behind the front line chucking shells into the distance but not so
much fun when youre facing an enemy close enough to spit at you . and if thats all
theyve got in mind think yourself lucky unless theyre one of those emperor forsaken
xenos that come equipped with venom sacs . 
but it wont come to that surely i said . now were here theyd be mad to attempt a
landing . to my astonishment divas laughed . 
they wont have to . theyre here already . this was new and unwelcome information
and i goggled at him in surprise . 
since when . i gasped . now id be the first to admit that im seldom that diligent when
it comes to reading the briefing slates but i was sure id have noticed something that
crucial to my well being in my cursory glance through it . divas shrugged . 
about six months apparently . they were already deployed on the planet when the
cleansing flame dropped us off here three weeks ago . 
this was seriously bad news . id been looking forward to a nice brisk round of target
practice on civilian rioters or at worst a turkey shoot against the odd renegade pdf 
unit . but now we were facing a foe that could give us a real run for our money . 
emperors bowels . if half of what id heard about the tau and their technosorcery was
true we could be the ones getting our arses kicked . divas grinned at my expression
misinterpreting it entirely . 
so you could see some fun after all he said clapping me on the back . i could have
killed him . 
i didnt of course . for one thing as ive said i dont have so many friends that i can
afford to waste them and for another divas had been here long enough to pick up
some vital information which i currently lacked . namely the location of the nearest
bar we could get to without attracting too much attention to ourselves . 
so we set out through the streets of mayoh together my commissars uniform getting
us through the guard on the compound gate without any argument although he did
give us a word of caution . 
be careful sir . theres been disturbances up in the heights1
 they say . that meant
nothing to me so i smiled and nodded and said wed be careful and checked with
divas that wed be going nowhere near there as soon as we were out of earshot . 
good emperor no he said frowning . its crawling with heretics . the only way youd
catch me up there is with a squadron of hellhounds to cleanse the place . needless to
say hed never seen what incendiary weapons can do to a man or he wouldnt have
been half so keen on the idea . i have and i wouldnt wish it on my worst enemy . 
actually there are one or two i would wish it on come to think of it and sit there
happily toasting caba nuts while they screamed but theyre all dead now anyway so
its beside the point . 
so where did they all come from . i asked as we made our way through the streets . 
dusk was falling now the luminators and the cafe signs flickering to life and the swirl
of bodies around us growing thicker as the night descended . small knots of passers by
stood aside to let us pass intimidated no doubt by our imperial uniforms and the
visible sidearms we carried   some with respect and others resentful . several of the
latter had the curious tonsure the heretic juvie had sported their heads shaved except
for a long scalplock . the significance of it wasnt to dawn on me until some time later
but even then i realised it was a badge of allegiance of some kind and that those who
bore it were liable to turn traitor if the shooting started . for now though they were
content merely to mutter insults under their breath . 
theyre local divas said not deigning to notice them which was fine by me . of all
the ways i could have ended up dead over the years getting sucked into a pointless
street brawl would have been among the most embarrassing . the whole planets

1 the most affluent area of the city where it began to rise up into the surrounding hills . though tau
influence on the local architecture was widespread as cain notes elsewhere it was more overt here than
anywhere else in mayoh . as a result it was popular with the most radical of the pro tau citizens and a
natural focus of protest for the imperial loyalists . as the political situation continued to 

deteriorate clashes
between the two factions became commonplace here . 

infested with xeno lovers . 
a bit of an exaggeration that but he was more or less right as i was later to discover . 
to cut a long story short the locals had been trading with the tau for several
generations by now which wasnt terribly sensible but what can you expect from a
bunch of backwater peasants . the end result was that most of them were quite used to
seeing xenos around the place and despite the sterling efforts of the local ecclesiarchy
to warn them that no good would come of it a lot of them had started to absorb
unhealthy ideas from them . which was where we came in ready to guide them back
into the imperial fold before they came to too much harm and all very noble of us too
im sure youll agree . 
the trouble is divas concluded downing the rest of his third amasec in one the hard
core are so far gone they dont see it like that . they think the tau are the best thing to
hit the galaxy since the emperor was in nappies and were the big bad bullies here to
take their shiny new toys away . 
well that might be a little more difficult now the tau are digging in i said . but im
surprised theyre prepared to risk it i followed suit feeling the smoky liquor warming
its way down through my chest . they must know well never allow them to annex the
place without a fight . 
they claim theyre just here to safeguard their trading interests divas said . we both
snorted with laughter at that one . we knew how often the imperium had said exactly
the same thing before launching an all out invasion of some luckless ball of dirt . of
course when we did it it was true and it was my job to shoot anyone who thought
otherwise . 
one for the diplomats then i said signalling for another round . a nicely rounded
waitress bustled over full of patriotic fervour and replenished our glasses . 
one thing i can say for divas he knew how to find a good bar . this one the eagles
wing was definitely in the loyalist camp . the wide smoky cellar full of planetary
defence force regulars were delighted to see some real soldiers at last and
fulminating at the governor for not letting them loose on the aliens years ago . the
owner was a corporal in the pdf reserves recently retired after twenty years service
and he couldnt seem to get over the honour of having a couple of real guard officers
in the place . and once divas had introduced me and id been appropriately modest
about my earlier adventures in the emperors name there was no question of us having
to pay the bill either . after signing autographs for some of the civilian customers   all
of whom urged us to pot a few of the little blue bastards on their behalf   and
charming the waitress had begun to pall wed retreated to a quiet side booth where we
could talk uninterrupted . 
i think the diplomats could be getting a little help on this one divas said tapping the
side of his nose conspiratorially as he lifted the glass . i drank a little more slowly
acutely aware that wed have to start making our way back through a potentially
hostile city soon and wanting to keep a reasonably clear head . 
help from who . i asked . 

who do you think . divas dipped his finger in the glass and sketched a stylised letter
i with a pair of crossbars bisecting it on the surface of the table before erasing it with
a sweep of his hand . i laughed . 
oh yeah them . right ive yet to arrive any place where the political situations fluid
without hearing rumours of inquisition agents beavering away behind the scenes and
unless i happen to be the errand boy in question i never believe a word of it . on the
other hand if there arent any rumours then they probably are up to some mischief
and no mistake about it . 1
you can laugh . divas finished his drink and replaced the glass on the table . but i
heard it from one of the administratum adepts who swore hed got it fromö
somewhere or other . an expression of faint bewilderment drifted across his face . i
think i need some fresh air . 
i think you do too i said . leaving aside what i thought then were his ridiculous
fantasies about the inquisition hed still given me a lot to think about . the situation
here was undoubtedly far more complex than id been led to believe and i needed to
consider things carefully . 
so we took our leave of our kindly hosts the waitress in particular looking sorry to see
me go and staggered up the stairway and into the street . 
the cold night air hit me like a refreshing shower snapping me back to alertness and
i glanced around while divas communed loudly with the emperor in a convenient
gutter . fortunately the bar hed steered us to was down a quiet side alley so no one
saw the dignity of the imperial uniform being sullied . once i was sure there were no
more eruptions to come i helped him to his feet . 
you used to be able to hold it better than that i chided and he shook his head
mournfully . 
local rotgut . not like the stuff we used to drink . and i should have eaten something . 
it would just have been a wasted effort i consoled him and glanced around trying to
get our bearings . where the frak are we anyway . 
dock zone he said confidently hardly swaying on his feet at all now . this way . he
strode off towards the nearest luminated thoroughfare . i shrugged and followed him . 
after all hed had three weeks to get his bearings . 
as we made our way through the well lit street however i began to feel a little
apprehensive . true wed been deep in conversation on our way to the bar but none of
the landmarks looked familiar to me and i began to wonder if his confidence had been
misplaced . 
toren i said after a while noticing a gradual increase in the number of scalplocks
and murderous glances among the passers by are you sure this is the way back to our
staging area . 

1 a reasonable assumption on both accounts . details of cains subsequent activities as my errand boy 

as
he puts it can be found in the ordos librum if any readers care to check the official accounts his 

own
version of these events can be found elsewhere in the archive but need not concern us at the moment . 

not ours he said the grin back on his face . theirs . thought youd like to get a look at
the enemy . 
you thought what . i yelped amazed at his stupidity . then i remembered . divas
bought the myth of my purported heroism completely and without question and had
done ever since hed seen me take on an entire tyranid swarm with just a chainsword
when we were callow youths together . purely by accident as it happened id had no
idea the damn bugs were even there until id blundered into them and if i hadnt ended
up inadvertently leading them into the beaten zone of our heavy ordnance and saving
the day theyd have torn me to pieces . waltzing up to the enemy encampment and
thumbing our noses at them probably struck him as the kind of thing i did for fun . are
you out of your mind . 
its perfectly safe he said . were not officially at war with them yet . well that was
true but i still wasnt keen on jumping the gun . 
and until we are were not going to provoke them . i said all commissarial duty . 
divass face fell like a child denied a sweet and i thought id better put a gloss on it
that would match his expectations of me . we cant put our own amusement ahead of
our responsibilities to the emperor however tempting it is . 
i suppose youre right he said reluctantly and i began to breathe a little more easily . 
now all i had to do was manoeuvre him back to the barracks before he got any more
stupid ideas . so i took him by the arm and turned him around . now how do we get
back to our compound . 
how about in a body bag . somebody asked . i turned feeling my stomach drop . 
about a dozen locals stood behind us the street light striking highlights from their
shaven heads a variety of improvised weapons hanging purposefully from their hands . 
they looked tough at least in their own minds but when youve been face to face with
orks and eldar reiver slavers you dont intimidate that easily . well all right . i do but i
dont show it which is the main thing . 
besides i had a laspistol and a chainsword which in my experience trumps a crowbar
every time . so i laid a restraining hand on divass shoulder as he was still intoxicated
enough to rise to the bait and smiled lazily . 
believe me i said you dont want to start anything . 
you dont tell me what i want . the groups spokesman stepped forward into the light . 
fine i thought keep them talking . but thats what you imperials do isnt it . 
i dont quite follow i said affecting mild curiosity . movement out of the corner of my
eye told me that our retreat had been cut off . a second group emerged from the alley
mouth behind us . i started calculating the odds . if i made a move to draw the laspistol
theyd rush me but id probably manage to get a shot off . if i took out the leader with
it and ran forward at the same time i stood a good chance of breaking through the
line and making a run for it . that assumed theyd be surprised or intimidated enough
to hesitate of course and i was able to open up a decent lead . with any luck theyd
turn on divas buying me enough time to get away but i couldnt be sure of that so i
continued to play for time and look for a better chance . 

youre here to take our world . the leader shouted . as he came forward fully into the
light i could see that his face was painted blue a delicate pastel shade . it should have
made him look ridiculous but the overall effect was somehow charismatic . but youll
never take our freedom . 
your freedom is what were here to give you you xeno hugging moron . divas broke
free of my restraining arm and lunged forward . but youre too brainwashed to see it . 
great . so much for diplomacy . still while he was set on re enacting gannacks
charge1
 i might be able to make a run for it . 
no such luck of course   the surrounding heretics drove in on us as a concerted
wedge . i just managed to draw my laspistol and snap off a shot taking out half the
face of one of the group which im bound to say didnt make much of a difference to
his overall personal charm before an iron bar came down hard on my wrist . ive been
in enough melees to have seen the blow coming and to have ridden it which saved
me from a fracture or worse but that didnt help the pain which exploded along my
arm deadening it . my fingers flew open and i ducked scrabbling after the precious
weapon but it was futile . a knee drove up into my ribs slamming the breath from my
lungs and i was down cold hard rockcrete scraping the skin from my knuckles (the
real ones anyway) and knowing i was a dead man unless i could get away somehow . 
toren . i screamed but divas had problems of his own by now and i wasnt going to
get any help from that quarter . i curled up trying to protect my vital organs and tried
frantically to get at my chainsword . of course i should have gone for that first
holding the mob at bay with it but hindsights about as much use as a heretics oath
and now the bloody thing was trapped under my own bodyweight . i scrabbled
frantically feeling fists and boots thudding against my ribs . luckily there were so
many of them that they were getting in each others way and my uniform greatcoat
was thick enough to absorb some of the impact or id have been in even worse shape
than i was . 
greechaahl something shrieked an inhuman scream that raised the hairs on the back
of my neck even under those conditions . my assailants hesitated and i rolled clear in
time to see the largest of them yanked back by sheer brute force . 
for a moment i thought i was hallucinating but the pain in my ribs was all too real . a
face dominated by a large hooked beak was gazing down at me surmounted by a crest
of quills that had been dyed or painted in some elaborate pattern and hot charnel
breath washed across my face making me gag . 
you are comparatively uninjured . the thing asked in curiously accented gothic . its
hard to convey in writing but its voice was glottal most of the consonants reduced to
hard clicking sounds . it was perfectly understandable mind you . my stupefaction was
due entirely to the fact that something that looked like that was able to talk in the first
place . 

yes thank you . i croaked after a moment . whenever you dont have a clue whats
going on ive always found it never hurts to be polite . 
that is gratifying the thing said and threw the heretic in its left hand casually away . 
the others were standing around aimlessly now like sulky schola students when the
tutor turns up to spoil the fun . then it extended the same thin scaly hand equipped
with dagger like claws towards me . after a heartstopping moment i divined its
intention and accepted the proffered assistance in gaining my feet . as i did so it
turned to the sullen group of heretics . 
this does not advance the greater good it said . disperse now and avoid conflict . 
well that was a challenge if ever id heard one . but to my surprise and i must admit
my intense relief the little knot of troublemakers slunk away into the shadows . i eyed
my rescuer a little apprehensively . he (or she   with kroot its impossible to tell and
only another kroot would care anyway) was slightly taller than i was and still looked
pretty intimidating . theyre tough enough to take on an ork in hand to hand combat
and i for one wouldnt be betting on the greenskin but if it wanted me dead it would
only have had to wait a few moments . i retrieved my fallen laspistol anyway and tried
to get my breath back . 
im obliged to you i said . i must admit i dont understand but im grateful i
fumbled the weapon back into its holster with some difficulty . my arm was swelling up
now and my fingers felt thick and unresponsive . my rescuer made a curious clicking
sound which i assumed to be its equivalent of laughter . 
imperial officers murdered by tau supporters . not a desirable outcome when the
political situation is tense . 
not a desirable outcome at any time when one of them is me i said and the xeno
made the clicking noise again . that reminded me of divas and i staggered across to
check on him . he was still breathing but unconscious a deep gash across his
forehead . id picked up enough battlefield medicine to know hed recover soon
enough but have the emperors own headache when he woke and that was fine with
me   serve the idiot right for nearly getting me killed . 
i have the honour to be gorok of the clan tcha the creature said . i am kroot . 
i know what you are i said . kroot killed my parents . and thereby got me dumped in
the schola progenium and thence into the commissariat instead of following my
undoubted true destiny of running some discreet little house of ill repute for slumming
spirers and guilders up from the sump with more money than sense to splash around . i
vaguely resented that far more than the loss of my progenitors who hadnt been all
that much to have around while they were alive to be honest . but it never hurts to
grab the moral high ground . my new acquaintance didnt seem terribly concerned
though . 
i trust they fought well he said . i doubted it . theyd only joined the guard to get out
of the hive ahead of the arbites and would certainly have deserted the first chance
they got so there must be something in genetics after all . 
not well enough i said and gorok clicked his amusement again . it was a slightly 
unnerving experience feeling that something so unhuman was able to read me more
readily than my own people . 
go carefully commissar he said . and feed on your enemies . may we have no cause
for conflict . 
well thank the emperor for that . but somehow i doubted that it was going to happen
and of course i was right . i was surprised though by how quickly the crisis came
upon us . 
it is perhaps worth pointing out at this juncture that the account of his background that
cain gives during his conversation with the kroot although superficially plausible doesnt
quite hold together on further elimination . for one thing admittance to the schola
progenium is a privilege usually reserved for the offspring of officers . if he was indeed the
son of common troopers his parents must have acquitted themselves with singular valour in
the action which resulted in their demise which to say the least seems remarkably at odds
with his characterisation of them . moreover he implies that they enlisted and served
together . although mixed units are as pointed out elsewhere not unheard of in the imperial
guard it would have been extremely unusual for this to have been the case . 
cain makes frequent references throughout the archive to having spent his early years on
a hive world but never specifies which one which in turn makes the verification of any
such claims virtually impossible . however no hive world of which im aware raised a
mixed guard regiment in the timeframe consistent with his narrative . 
we should also bear in mind that by his own admission the man was a pathological liar
given to saving anything he judged would be effective in manipulating his listeners . 
four its often remarked that diplomacy is just warfare by other means . our battles are no
less desperate for being bloodless but at least we get wine and finger food . 
  tollen ferlang imperial envoy to the realm of ultramar 564 603 m41 . 
are you sure youre fit enough . kasteen asked a faint frown of concern appearing
between her eyebrows . i nodded and adjusted the sling id adopted for dramatic
effect . it was black silk matching the ebony hues of my dress uniform and made me
look tolerably dashing i thought . 
im fine i said smiling bravely . the other fellows got the worst of it thank the
emperor . in the day or two since the brawl with the heretics my arm had more or less
healed the medicae assuring me that id suffered nothing worse than severe bruising . 
it was still stiff and ached a little but all in all i thought id come off lightly . far
better than divas had anyway . hed spent the night in the infirmary and still walked
with a stick . for all that though he was as irritatingly cheerful as ever and id been
finding as many duties as i could to keep me out of the way whenever he suggested
socialising again . 
luckily for me hed lost consciousness before the kroot turned up so my reputation
had received another unmerited embellishment . he assumed id seen off our assailants
single handed and i saw no good reason to disabuse him . besides the conversation
id had with the creature had been curiously unsettling and i found myself reluctant to
think about it too hard . i noticed divass account had tactfully glossed over the reason
why we were in the thick of the tau sympathizers heartland so maybe theyd finally
knocked a little common sense into him . knowing divas though i doubted it . 
well thats what they get for picking on the imperiums finest kasteen said eager to
buy the generally accepted version of events as the latest evidence of my exceptional
martial abilities reflected well on the regiment she led . she adjusted her own dress
uniform tugging the ochre greatcoat into place with every sign of discomfort . like
most valhallans she had an iceworlders tolerance for cold and found even the
mildest of temperate climates a little uncomfortable . having spent most of my service
with valhallan regiments id long become inured to their habit of air conditioning
their quarters to temperatures which left the breath smoking and tended to wear my
commissarial greatcoat at all times but they were still adjusting to the local conditions
here with some difficulty . 
if i might suggest colonel . i said tropical order would be perfectly acceptable . 
would it . she hovered indecisively reminding me again how young she was to be in
such an elevated position and i felt an unaccustomed pang of sympathy . the prestige
of the regiment was in her hands and it was easy to forget how heavily the
responsibility weighed on her . 
it would i assured her . she discarded the heavy fur cap disordering her hair and began to unfasten the coat . then she hesitated . 
i dont know she said . if they think im too informal itll reflect badly on all of us . 
for the emperors sake regina broklaw said his voice amused . what sort of
impression do you think youll make if youre sweating like an ork all evening . i
noted his use of her given name the first time id heard him do so with quiet
satisfaction . another milestone on the 597ths march towards full integration . the real
test would come with their first taste of combat of course and all too soon at that but
it was a good omen . the commissars right
the commissars always right i said smiling . it says so in the regulations . 
well i cant argue with that . kasteen pulled off the coat with evident relief and
smoothed the jacket beneath it . it was severely cut emphasising her figure in ways that
i was sure would attract the attention of most of the men in the room . broklaw nodded
approvingly . 
i dont think you need to worry about making an impression he said proffering a
comb . 
so long as its a good one . she smoothed her hair into place and began buckling her
weapon belt . like mine it held a chainsword but hers was ornately gilded and worked
with devotional scenes that decorated scabbard and hilt alike . the contrast with my
own functional model chipped and battered with far too much use for my liking was
striking . the holster at her other hip was immaculate too the glossy black leather
holding a bolt pistol which also gleamed from every highly polished surface and
which was intricately engraved with icons of the saints . 
no doubt about that i assured her . 
her nervousness was quite understandable as wed been invited to a diplomatic
reception at the governors palace . at least i had and in the interests of protocol the
colonel of my regiment and an appropriate honour guard would also be expected . this
sort of soiree was quite beyond her experience and she was all too acutely aware that
she was out of her depth . i on the other hand was well within mine . one of the many
benefits of being a hero of the imperium is that youre regarded as a prime catch by a
certain type of society hostess which meant that id had plenty of opportunity to enjoy
the homes wine cellars and daughters of the idle rich over the years and had
developed an easy familiarity with the world in which they moved . the main thing to
remember as i confided to kasteen was that they had their own idea of what soldiers
were like which had very little to do with the reality . 
the best thing you can do i said is not to get sucked in to all that protocol nonsense
in the first place . theyll expect us to get it wrong anyway so to the warp with them . 
she smiled in spite of herself and settled a little more comfortably into the upholstery
of the staff car jurgen had found somewhere . armed with my commissarial authority
which let him requisition practically anything short of a battleship without argument
hed developed quite a talent for acquiring anything i considered necessary for my
comfort or convenience over the years . i never asked too many questions about where
theyd come from as i suspected some of the answers might have complicated my life . 
thats easy for you to say she said . youre a hero . im justó
one of the youngest regimental commanders in the entire guard i said . a position
that in my opinion you hold entirely on merit i smiled . and my confidence is not
lightly earned it was what she needed to hear of course ive always been good at
manipulating people . thats one of the reasons im so good at my job . she began to
look a little happier . 
so what do you suggest . she said . 
i shrugged . they might be rich and powerful but theyre only civilians . however hard
they try to hide it theyll be in awe of you . ive always found it best at these things just
to be a plain simple military man with no interest in politics . the emperor points
and we obey . 
through the warp and far away . she finished the old song line with a smile . so we
shouldnt offer any opinions or answer questions about policy . 
exactly i said . if they want to talk tell them a few stories about your old campaigns . 
thats all theyre interested in anyway . that was certainly true in my case . i was sure
id only been invited as patriotic window dressing to impress the tau with the calibre
of the opposition theyd be facing if they were foolish enough to try and make a fight
of it with us . of course in my case that meant they could pretty much run their flag
up the pole of the governors palace any time they felt like it but that was beside the
point . 
thank you ciaphas . kasteen put her chin on her hand and watched the street lights
flicker past outside the window . that was the first time anyone in the regiment had
addressed me in personal terms since i joined it . it felt strange but curiously pleasant . 
youre welcomeö regina i said and she smiled . (i know what youre thinking and
youre wrong . i did come to think of her as a friend in the end and broklaw too but
thats as far as it went . anything else would have made both our positions untenable . 
sometimes looking back i think thats a shame but there it is . )
the governors palace was in what the locals called the old quarter where the fad
for tau influenced architecture which had infected the rest of the city had failed to take
hold so the vague sense of unease which had oppressed me since we arrived began to
lift at last . the villas and mansions slipping past outside the car had taken on the
familiar blocky contours of the imperial architecture with which id been familiar all
my life and i felt my spirits begin to rise to the point where i almost began to
anticipate enjoying the evening ahead of us . 
jurgen swung the vehicle through an elaborate pair of wrought iron gates decorated
with the imperial aquila and our tyres hissed over raked gravel as we progressed
down a long curving drive lit by flickering flambeaux . behind us the truck with our
honour guard followed no doubt making a terrible mess of things with its heavy duty
tyres the soldiers making the most of the grandstand view afforded by its open rear
decking to point and chatter at the sights . beyond the flickering firelight we could
make out a rolling landscaped lawn dotted with shrubs and ornamental fountains  
automatically some part of my mind was assessing the best way of using them for 
cover . 
an audible gasp from kasteen signalled that the palace itself had come into view from
her side window and a moment later the curve of the drive brought it into my field of
vision . 
not a bad little billet i said with elaborate casualness . kasteen composed herself
wiping the bumpkin gawp off her face . 
reminds me of a bordello we used to visit when i was an officer cadet she replied
determined to match my blase exterior . i grinned . 
good i said . remember were soldiers . were not impressed by this sort of thing . 
absolutely not she agreed straightening her jacket unnecessarily . 
there was a lot of the building not to be impressed by . it must have covered over a
kilometre from end to end although of course much of that area would be given over
to courtyards and interior gardens currently hidden behind the outer wall . buttresses
and crenellations protruded like acne from every surface encrusted with statuary
commemorating previous governors and other local notables no one could now
remember the names of and vast areas had been gilded reflecting the firelight from
outside in a manner which was to prove eerily prophetic had we but known . at the
time though it simply struck me as one of the most stridently vulgar piles of masonry
id ever encountered . jurgen pulled up outside the main entrance halting at the end of
a red carpet as skilfully as a shuttle pilot entering a docking port . after a moment the
truck pulled up behind us and our honour guard piled out deploying on either side of
it a full squad five pairs of troopers facing each other across the crimson weave
lasguns at the port . 
shall we . i extended an arm to kasteen as a flunkey dressed as a wedding cake
bustled up to open the door for us . 
thank you commissar . she took it as we emerged and i stopped for a moment to
have a word with jurgen . 
any further orders sir . 
i shook my head . just find somewhere to park and get yourself something to eat i
said . strictly speaking i could have had my aide accompany us but the thought of
jurgen mingling with the cream of the gravalaxian aristocracy was almost too hideous
to contemplate . i turned to the noncom in charge of the honour guard a sergeant
lustig and tapped the combead id slipped into my ear . you too i added . you might
as well be comfortable while you wait for us . ill contact you when were ready to
leave . 
yes sir . a faint smile tried to form on his broad face before discipline reasserted
itself and he inhaled . 
squadö attenö shun . he bellowed and they snapped to it with nanosecond
precision . no surprise that theyd won the extra drink ration this week i thought . the
crash of synchronised heels caused heads to turn all around us minor local nobles
looking mightily impressed and their chauffeurs even more so . 
i think weve made an impression kasteen murmured as we gained the elaborately carved entrance doors . 
That was the idea I agreed . 
Inside it was exactly as Id anticipated the kind of vulgar ostentation too many of the
wealthy mistake for good taste with crystal and gilt and garish tapestries of historic
battles and smug looking primarchs strewn around the place like a pirates warehouse . 
The high arched ceiling was supported by pillars artfully carved to mimic the bark of
some species of local tree and my feet sank into the carpet as though it were a swamp . 
It took me a moment to realise that the weave would form a vast portrait presumably
of the governor himself if viewed from the upper landing and I noted with faint
amusement that someone had trodden on a dropped canape making it look as though
his nose was running . Whether it was a genuine accident or the act of a disgruntled
servant who could say . Kasteens lips quirked as she absorbed the full opulence of
our surroundings . 
I take it back she said quietly . A bordello would have been done out in far better
taste . I suppressed a smile of my own as another flunkey ushered us forward . 
Commissar Ciaphas Cain he announced . And Colonel Regina Kasteen . Which at
least established who we were . It was pretty obvious who the unhealthy looking
individual sitting on a raised dais at the end of the room was . Ive met a good few
planetary governors in my day and they all tend towards inbred imbecility1
 but this
specimen looked like he should take the prize . He somehow contrived to look both
undernourished and flabby at the same time and his skin was the pallor of a dead fish . 
Watery eyes of no particular colour goggled at us from under a fringe of thinning grey
hair . 
Governor Grice I said bowing formally . A pleasure . 
On the contrary he said his voice quivering a little . The pleasures entirely mine . 
Well he wasnt wrong on that account but he was ignoring me entirely . He stood and
bowed to Kasteen . You honour us all with your presence colonel . 
Well that was a new experience being ignored in favour of a slip of a girl but I
suppose if youd ever met her youd understand it . She was pretty striking if redheads
were your thing and I supposed the old fool didnt get out much . Anyway it enabled
me to fade out of the picture and go looking for some amusement of my own which I
did with all due dispatch . 
As was my habit I circulated widely keeping my eyes and ears open as you never know
what useful little snippets of information will come in handy although the main thing
that caught my attention was the entertainment . 
Like many of Cains sweeping generalisations this does contain an element of truth . The majority of
planetary governorships are hereditary positions and many of the incumbents arent up to the challenge of
the job . However the truly incompetent tend to be weeded out by the ceaseless round of dynastic power
struggles and coups detat which keep the aristocracy amused and in cases where Imperial interests are
directly threatened we can always turn to the Officio Assassinorum . 

all I cared because her voice was extraordinary . She was singing old sentimental
favourites like The Night Before You Left and The Love We Share and even an old cynic
like me could appreciate the emotion she put into them and feel that just this once
the trite words were ringing true . Snatches of her husky contralto carried through the
room wherever I was cutting through the backbiting and the small talk and I felt my
eyes drifting in her direction every time the crowd parted enough to afford me a view . 
And the view was well worth it . She was tail and slim with shoulder length hair of a
shade of blonde Ive never seen on anyone else before or since hanging loose to frame
a face which nearly stopped my heart . Her eyes were the hazy blue of a far horizon
and seemed to transfix me whenever I looked in her direction . Her dress was the same
colour almost exactly and clung to her figure like mist . 
Now Ive never believed in sentimental nonsense like love at first sight but I can say
without a word of a lie that even now after almost a century I can close my eyes and
picture her as she was then and hear those songs as though shes still in the same
room . 
But I wasnt there to listen to cabaret singers however enchanting so I tried my best
to mingle and pick up whatever gossip I could that would help us fight the tau if we
had to and keep me out of it if at all possible . 
So youre the famous Commissar Cain someone said passing me a fresh drink . I took
it automatically turning a little to use my right hand and emphasize the sling and
found myself looking at a narrow faced fellow in an expensive but understated robe
which positively screamed diplomat . He glanced at the sling . I hear you nearly started
the war early . 
Not from choice I can assure you . I said . Just defending an officer who lacked the
self restraint to ignore a blatant piece of sedition . 
I see . He eyed me narrowly trying to size me up . I kept my expression neutral . I take
it your self restraint is a little stronger . 
At the moment I said choosing my words with care were still at peace with the tau . 
The internal situation here is Ill admit a little disturbing but unless the Guard is
ordered to intervene thats purely a matter for the Arbites the PDF and His
Excellency I nodded at Grice who was listening to Kasteen explain the best way of
disembowelling a termagant with every sign of interest although his retinue of
sycophants was beginning to look a little green around the gills . Im not averse to
fighting if I have to but thats a decision for wiser heads than mine to take . 
I see . He nodded and stuck out a hand for me to shake . After a moments juggling
more to put him off balance than anything I transferred the glass to my other hand and
took it . Erasmus Donali Imperial Envoy . 
I thought as much . I smiled in return . You have the look of a diplomat about you . 
Whereas you seem quite exceptional for a soldier . Donali sipped his drink and I
followed suit finding it a very pleasant vintage . Most of them cant wait for the
shooting to start . 
Theyre Imperial Guard I said . They live to fight for the Emperor . Im a commissar 

Im supposed to consider the bigger picture . 
Which includes avoiding combat . You surprise me . 
As I said before I told him thats not my decision to make . But if people like you
can solve the conflict by negotiation and keep troopers who would have died here
alive to fight another enemy another day and maybe tip the balance in a more
important battle then it seems to me that youre serving the best interests of the
Imperium . And keeping my skin whole into the bargain of course which was far
more important to me . Donali looked surprised and a little gratified . 
I can see your reputation is far from exaggerated he said . And I hope I can oblige
you . But it may not be easy . 
That wasnt what I wanted to hear you can be sure . But I shrugged and sipped my
drink . 
As the Emperor wills I said a phrase Id picked up from Jurgen over the course of
our long association . Of course when he says it he means every word from me its just
the verbal equivalent of a shrug . Ive never really bought the idea that His Divine
Majesty can spare some attention from the job of preventing the entire galaxy from
sliding into damnation to look out for my interests too or anyone elses for that
matter which is why Im so diligent about doing it for myself . The difficulty I take it
being the public support for the tau in certain quarters . 
Exactly . My new friend nodded gloomily . For which you can thank the imbecile over
there talking to your colonel . He indicated Grice with a tilt of his head . He got so
carried away counting his bribes from the likes of himÖ another tilt of the head to the
far corner of the room that he hardly even noticed his planet slipping out from under
him . 
I turned in the direction hed indicated . A cadaverous hawk nosed individual dressed
in unwise scarlet hose and a burgundy tabard was holding forth to a knot of the local
aristocracy . Flanking him were a couple of servants in livery who looked about as
comfortable as an ork in evening dress hired guns if Id ever seen them . A scribe
hovered next to him making notes . 
One of the rogue traders weve heard so much about I said . Donali shrugged . 
So he says . But no one here is entirely what they seem commissar . You can certainly
depend on that . 
Well he was right on the money so far as I was concerned . So I exchanged a few more
inconsequential words and resumed circulating . After a few more conversations with
local dignitaries whose names I never quite caught my glass was in need of
replenishment and I headed towards the table at the far end of the room where an
enticing display of delicacies had been laid out . On the way I noticed Kasteen had
managed to extricate herself from the governors presence and was working the room
as though shed been a habitue of high society since she could walk . The air of
confidence she now radiated was remarkable especially set against her earlier
nervousness but the ability to seem calm and in control whatever the circumstances is
a vital quality in a leader and for all I knew she was shamming it as shamelessly as I 

was . It certainly looked as though she was enjoying herself though and I gave her a
light hearted salute as our eyes briefly met . She responded with a flashing grin and
whirled away towards the dance floor with a couple of aristocratic fops in tow . 
It looks like youve lost your date a voice said behind me . I turned and found myself
falling into the wide blue eyes of the singer Id been watching before . 
Uncharacteristically for me I was momentarily at a loss for words . She was smiling a
plate of finger food in her hand . 
Shes ah just a colleague I said . A fellow officer . Nothing like that between us . 
Strictly against regulations for one thing . And anyway were not
She laughed a warm smoky chuckle which warmed me like amasec and I realised
she was pulling my leg . 
I know she said . No time for romance in the Imperial Guard . It must be grim for
you . 
We have our duty to the Emperor I said . For a soldier thats enough . Its the sort of
thing I usually say and most civilians lap it up but my beautiful singer was looking at
me quizzically the ghost of a smile quirking at the corner of her mouth and I
suddenly got the feeling that she could see right through me to the core of deceit and
self interest I normally keep concealed from the world . It was an unnerving sensation . 
For some maybe . But I think theres more to you than meets the eye . She picked up a
bottle from the nearby table with her free hand and topped up my glass . 
Theres more to everyone than meets the eye I said more to deflect the conversation
than anything else . She smiled again . 
Thats very astute commissar . She extended a hand slim and cool to the touch the
middle finger ornamented with a large and finely wrought ring of unusual
workmanship . Evidently she was extremely successful in her profession or had at
least one wealthy admirer I would have laid money on both . I kissed it formally as
etiquette demanded and to my astonishment she giggled . 
A gentleman as well as an officer . You are full of surprises . Then she surprised me by
dropping a curtsey in imitation of the bovine debutantes surrounding us the light of
mischief in her dazzling eyes . Im Amberley Vail by the way . I sing a bit . 
I know I said . And very well too . She acknowledged the compliment with a tilt of
her head . I bowed formally entering into the game . Ciaphas Cain I said at your
service . Currently attached to the Valhallan 597th . Her eyes widened a little as I
introduced myself . 
Ive heard of you she said a little breathlessly . Didnt you fight the genestealers on
Keffia . Well I had if you count hanging around drinking recaf while the artillery unit I
was with dropped shells on the biggest concentrations of stealers we could find from
kloms away as fighting . Id been in at the death so to speak and emerged with a great
deal of the credit more by luck than good judgement . It was one of the early incidents
that had laid the foundations of my undeserved reputation for heroism but my
misadventures since had tended to overshadow what most of the galaxy still regarded as
a minor incident on a backwater agriworld . 

Not entirely alone I said slipping easily into the modest hero demeanour I could
adopt without thinking . There was an Imperial battlefleet in orbit at the time . 
And two full divisions of Imperial Guard on planet . She laughed again at my
astonished expression . I have relatives in Skandaburg . 
 Youre still talked about back there . 
I cant think why I said . I was just doing my job . 
Of course . Amberley nodded and again I got the feeling that she wasnt fooled for a
moment . Youre an Imperial commissar . Duty before everything right . 
Absolutely I said . And right now I think its my duty to ask you to dance . It was a
transparent attempt to change the subject which I hoped shed put down to modest
embarrassment and I half expected her to refuse . But she smiled discarding her plate
of half eaten delicacies and took my uninjured arm . 
Id love to she said . Ive a few minutes before my second set . 
So we drifted across to the dance floor and I spent a very pleasant few minutes with
her head on my shoulder as we spun around to an old waltz I never learned the name
of . Kasteen galloped past a couple of times a different swain in tow on each occasion
raising an eyebrow in a way which forewarned me of some relentless leg pulling on
our drive back to the compound but just at that moment I couldnt have cared less . 
Eventually Amberley pulled away with what seemed like reluctance unless I was
succumbing to wishful thinking and began to return to the stage . I walked with her
chatting to no purpose intent simply on prolonging a pleasant interlude in what
otherwise promised to be a dull evening and it was thus that I noticed a quiet
vehement altercation between Grice and the hawk faced rogue trader . 
Do you know who that is . I asked not really expecting an answer but it seemed my
companion was well versed in the intricacies of Gravalaxian politics . It came with
performing for the aristocracy I supposed . She nodded looking surprised . 
His names Orelius . A rogue trader here to deal with the tau . So he says . The
qualification was delivered in precisely the same tone of scepticism as Donalis had
been and for some reason I found myself remembering Divass cloak and dagger
fantasies from our night in the Eagles Wing . 
Why do you say that . I asked . Amberley shrugged . 
The tau have been dealing with the same traders for more than a century . Orelius
arrived from nowhere a month or two ago and tried opening negotiations with them
through Grice . It may just be a coincidence but She shrugged her dress slipping
across her slim shoulders . 
Why now with the political situation destabilising . I asked . She nodded . 
It does seem a little unusual . 
Perhaps hes hoping to take advantage of the confusion to strike a better deal I said . 
Orelius turned on his heel as I watched and marched away trailed by his bodyguards . 
The provincial capital of the smaller of the Northern continents . Most of the action in the cleansing of
Keffia took place on the southern continent where the genestealer cult was most deeply entrenched so
Skandaburg and its population would have been relatively untouched by the fighting . 

Grice was pale and sweating even more than usual and reached out to pluck a drink
from a nearby servitor with a trembling hand . Hes thrown a scare into our illustrious
governor at any event . 
Has he . Amberley watched him go . That seems a little presumptuous even for a
rogue trader . 
If thats what he really is . I said without thinking . Those depthless blue eyes turned
on me again . 
What else would he be . 
An inquisitor I said the idea taking firmer root in my head even as I said it . 
Amberleys eyes widened . 
An inquisitor . Here . Her voice became a little tremulous as though the enormity of
the idea were too huge to grasp . What makes you think that . 
The urge to impress her was almost irresistible I have to confess and if you could
only know how bewitching she was I know youd have felt the same . So I looked my
most commissarial . 
All I can say I told her lowering my voice for dramatic effect is that Ive heard from
a reliable military source which sounded a lot better than from a drunken idiot Im
sure youll agree that there are Inquisition agents active on Gravalax . 
Surely not . She shook her head blonde tresses flying in confusion . And even if there
were why would you suspect Orelius . 
Well just look at him I said . Everyone knows that undercover inquisitors disguise
themselves as rogue traders most of the time1
 . Its by far the easiest way of travelling
incognito with the rabble of hangers on they all seem to attract . 
You could be right she said with a delicate shiver . But its no concern of ours . 
Well I couldnt agree more of course but thats not what my heroic reputation leads
people to expect of me so I put on my best dutiful expression and said The security
of the Imperium is the concern of all of His Majestys loyal servants . Well thats true
too and it lets me out but no one needs to know that . Amberley nodded sombrely
and trotted back to the stage and I watched her go cursing myself for an idiot for
puncturing the mood . 
As youll no doubt appreciate the rest of the evening promised to be anticlimactic so I
drifted back to the food and drink . Our rations back at the compound were adequate
enough but I wasnt going to pass up the opportunity to savour a few delicacies while
they were there for the taking and it was as good a vantage point as any to enjoy
Amberleys performance from . It was also as Id learned from uncountable similar
affairs the best spot from which to cull gossip since everyone gravitated there sooner
or later . 
Thus it was that I made the acquaintance of Orelius without the faintest presentiment
of the trouble that innocent conversation would lead to . 
It is indeed regrettable that this predilection has become so widely known . Personally I blame popular
fiction for perpetuating the stereotype although it has to be said that some inquisitors are simply woefully
lacking in imagination when required to adopt a disguise . 

If anything I suppose it was the sling that was to blame . It had seemed a good idea at
the time but now I came to fill a plate the damn thing got in the way preventing me
from reaching out for the palovine pastries perched on the opposite side of the table . If
I transferred the plate to my left hand I was turned awkwardly my centre of mass
shifted so I still couldnt reach . I was trying to work out a way of getting to them
when a thin arm reached across to pick up the dish . 
Allow me . The voice was dry and cultured . I transferred a couple of the delicacies to
my plate and found myself addressing the man Id almost convinced myself was an
inquisitorial agent . It was ridiculous of course but stillÖ
Thank you sieur Orelius I said . Youre most kind . 
Have we met . His eyes were shadowed the irises were almost black and had an
unnerving piercing quality that increased his resemblance to a bird of prey . 
Your reputation precedes you I said blandly letting him make of that what he would . 
I dont mind admitting I was less relaxed than I tried to look . If he really was an
inquisitor there was a good chance he was a psyker too and might know me for what I
was but Id encountered mindreaders before and knew that they werent as formidable
as most people thought . Most of them can only read surface thoughts and I was so
long practiced at dissembling that I did so without any conscious awareness of the fact . 
Im sure it does . He was an old hand at this game too I realised an essential skill
whether his profession was as it appeared or as I had surmised . 
You seem to have the ear of His Excellency I said and the first momentary flicker of
emotion appeared on his face . Id got in under his guard it seemed . 
I have both . Unfortunately His Excellency appears to lack anything between them . 
He took one of the pastries for himself . Hes paralysed with indecision . 
Indecision about what . I asked ingenuously . 
Where his best interests lie . And those of his people of course . Orelius bit into the
delicacy as though it were Grices neck . Unless he starts showing some leadership
this world will go down in blood and burning . But he sits and vacillates and hopes it
will all go away . 
Then lets hope he comes to his senses soon I said . The keen eyes impaled me again . 
Indeed . His voice was level . For all our sakes . He smiled then without warmth . The
Emperor be with you Commissar Cain . My surprise must have shown on my face
because the smile widened a fraction . Your reputation precedes you too . 
And then he was gone leaving me curiously troubled . I didnt have long to dwell on
my unease though because the flunkey whod announced our arrival was back
looking a little flustered . Hed called out a number of names since Kasteen and I had
made our entrance but it was clear that this time he expected to be listened to . He
pounded a staff on the polished wooden floor and the babble of voices gradually
diminished Amberleys trailed away in mid chorus which was a real shame . The
flunkeys chest inflated with self importance . 
Your Excellency . My lords ladies and gentlemen . Oran Shuisassai Ambassador of
the tau . 
And for the first time since arriving on Gravalax I was face to face with the enemy . 

ONE THING ILL say for the tau they certainly know how to make an impressive
entrance . Shuisassai was draped in a simple white robe which made all the Imperial
dignitaries look ridiculously overdressed and was surrounded by others of his kind
similarly attired . There was no mistaking who was in charge though as his charisma
filled the room his entourage bobbing in his wake as he strode confidently across the
polished wooden floor towards Grice like seabirds around a fishing boat . I didnt realise
at the time how apt the mental image was of course1
 . What I did notice almost at once
was the bluish cast of his skin and that of his compatriots which Id been led to
expect from Divass gossip and the various reports Id read . What I hadnt expected
was the single braid that grew from his otherwise hairless skull plaited and
ornamented with ribbons in a variety of colours which contrasted vividly with the
plain simplicity of his garment . The meaning of the bizarre hairstyle sported by their
human dupes which Id noted many times since our landing thus became clear to me
along with the face paint the leader of the street gang had worn and I found myself
suppressing a shiver of unease . If so many citizens had been influenced so openly by
these alien interlopers the situation was dire indeed and my chances of keeping well
away from trouble problematic at best . 
It reminded me of something else too and after a moment I recalled the decoration
Gorok the kroot had applied to the quills on his head . Clearly the races of the tau
empire saw nothing wrong in absorbing the mores and fashions of one anothers
cultures eroding their very identities in the name of their union a notion any loyal
Imperial citizen would have regarded with as much horror as I did . Id seen at first
hand what happened when traitors and heretics abandoned their humanity to follow
the twisted teachings of Chaos and the thought of how fertile a soil the warp spawned
abominations would find the Imperium if it were ever to become as unwittingly open
to alien influence as the tau and their dupes chilled my very soul . Shuisassais flunkies
also had their single tail of hair ornamented though slightly less flamboyantly and I
found myself wondering if the pattern denoted some subtle graduations of status
among them or were merely intended to be decorative . 
Smug little grox fondler . Donali was at my elbow again the words delivered through
almost motionless lips as he made brief eye contact with the xeno and raised his
wineglass in greeting . He thinks hes got the whole planet sewn up . 
And does he . I asked more out of politeness than actually expecting an answer . 
Not yet . Donali watched as the xeno delegation made its ritual greeting to Grice . But
hes certainly got the governor in his pocket . 
The ambassador like all tau diplomats would be one of the Water caste . 

Are you sure about that . I asked . Donali must have detected something in my
intonation because his attention switched to me at once a sensation I found mildly
disconcerting . 
You suspect he might be underÖ other influences . he suggested watching my face
for a flicker of reaction . Well good luck to him a lifetime of dissembling had left me
virtually impossible to read in that way . I indicated Orelius with a tilt of my head he
was watching the exchange between Grice and the tau diplomat warily trying not to
look as though he was paying it any attention . 
Our rogue trader friend had quite a conversation with His Excellency earlier this
evening I said . And neither of them seem terribly happy about it . 
Youve spoken to Orelius . Once again I found myself in the middle of a verbal
fencing match . Emperors bowels I thought irritably doesnt anyone around here ever
say what they mean . 
We exchanged a few words I said shrugging . He seems to think the shootings about
to start
The bark of a bolt pistol going off echoed around the ballroom and I dived for cover
behind an overstuffed sofa even before the rational part of my mind had identified the
source of the sound . I may not be a paragon of virtue but I like to think my survival
instincts more than makes up for any moral shortcomings I might possess . 
Donali stood gaping as the room erupted in panic and screams . Half the guests
started running in no particular direction while the others stared around themselves in
half witted stupefaction . Priceless crystal goblets shattered underfoot as drinks were
dropped and swords were unsheathed and every kind of sidearm imaginable suddenly
appeared in hands on every side . 
Treachery . one of the tau shrieked glaring around itself and drawing some kind of
handgun from the recesses of its robes . Shuisassai was down thick purple blood
everywhere and I knew from experience that he wouldnt be getting up again . 
The bolter round had exploded inside his chest cavity redecorating the immediate
vicinity with tau viscera which I was mildly intrigued to note was darker in colour
than the human equivalent something to do with the colour of their skin I assumed . 
Kasteen . I activated the combead in my ear . Where are you . 
Over by the stage . I lifted my head scanning the room and located her as she
scrambled up next to Amberley who was gazing at the crowd as though mesmerised . 
Did you see where the shot came from . 
No . She hesitated a fraction of a second . My attention was elsewhere . Sorry
commissar . 
No need to be I said . You werent to know this was going to turn into a warzone . In
truth that looked uncomfortably like what was happening . Practically everyone with a
ceremonial sidearm had drawn it in a panic stricken reflex except for Kasteen and
myself and was looking for someone to use it on . Which meant identifying the
assassin would be virtually impossible by now . 
Is this how you respond to proposals of peace . The gun waving tau was
getting hysterical swinging the weapon wildly . It was only a matter of seconds I thought
before he pulled the trigger or more likely someone else shot him before he had the
chance . Either way it was going to start a massacre and I had no intention of getting
caught in the middle of it . I voxed . Jurgen . Were leaving now . There may be resistance . 
Sir . Jurgens voice was as phlegmatic as ever . 
Commissar . Lustigs was inflected with the query he was too well trained to ask . But
I wasnt about to let the honour guard blunder into a firefight without warning . I was
going to need them if I expected to get out of here . 
The tau ambassador has just been assassinated I said . Then I cursed my own
stupidity . The channel wasnt secured which meant every listening post on both sides
had probably picked up my transmission . Oh well too late to worry about that now . 
My main priority was getting the hell out of here in one piece . Unfortunately that
meant getting past the tau delegation which looked like it was becoming a fire magnet
for every Imperial hothead in the room . 
There was only one thing for it . With a curious sense of dÈj vu I strode forwards my
hands held out from my sides away from my weapons . 
Please bear in mind that barely a minute had passed by this time and the room was
far from silent . Practically everyone was shouting at everyone else and no one was
listening . The rest of the tau were babbling away in their own language . It sounded
like frying grox steaks to me but the gist of it was obviously put that bloody thing
away before you get us all shot and the other guests were screaming drop it . at him
and each other . I realised that with the tangle of competing factions and interests in the
room there would be a complete bloodbath the moment anyone pulled a trigger . 
Which was probably what the assassin was counting on to cover his tracks . 
Colonel . With me . Kasteen could cover my back at least . I saw her slip off the stage
and start towards me through the milling mob Amberley had already disappeared
sensible girl . 
You . You did this . The tau stuck the muzzle of his curiously featureless pistol under
Grices chin . The governor seemed to lose even more colour if that were possible and
spluttered incoherently . 
Thats ridiculous . What would I have to gain
More lies . The tau shrugged off the restraining hands of his colleagues . The truth or
you die . 
This does not advance the greater good I said echoing the words of the kroot . I
wasnt quite sure what they meant but I hoped they had more resonance for the tau
than yet another variation on put it down before I shoot you which didnt seem to be
having much effect . 
It worked better than Id dared to hope . Every tau in the group including the maniac
with the gun stared at me with something I took to be astonishment .